 the project gutenberg ebook of prid and prejud , by jan aust chapt 1 it is a tru univers acknowledg , that a singl man in possess of a good fortun , must be in want of a wif . howev littl known the feel or view of such a man may be on his first ent a neighbo , thi tru is so wel fix in the mind of the surround famy , that he is consid the right property of som on or oth of their daught . `` my dear mr. bennet , '' said his lady to him on day , `` hav you heard that netherfield park is let at last ? '' mr. bennet reply that he had not . `` but it is , '' return she ; `` for mrs. long has just been her , and she told me al about it . '' mr. bennet mad no answ . `` do you not want to know who has tak it ? '' cri his wif impaty . `` you want to tel me , and i hav no object to hear it . '' thi was invit enough . `` why , my dear , you must know , mrs. long say that netherfield is tak by a young man of larg fortun from the nor of england ; that he cam down on monday in a cha and four to see the plac , and was so much delight with it , that he agree with mr. mor immedy ; that he is to tak possess bef michaelma , and som of his serv ar to be in the hous by the end of next week . '' `` what is his nam ? '' `` bingley . '' `` is he marry or singl ? '' `` oh ! singl , my dear , to be sur ! a singl man of larg fortun ; four or fiv thousand a year . what a fin thing for our girl ! '' `` how so ? how can it affect them ? '' `` my dear mr. bennet , '' reply his wif , `` how can you be so tiresom ! you must know that i am think of his marry on of them . '' `` is that his design in settl her ? '' `` design ! nonsens , how can you talk so ! but it is very lik that he may fal in lov with on of them , and theref you must visit him as soon as he com . '' `` i see no occas for that . you and the girl may go , or you may send them by themselv , which perhap wil be stil bet , for as you ar as handsom as any of them , mr. bingley may lik you the best of the party . '' `` my dear , you flat me . i certain hav had my shar of beauty , but i do not pretend to be anyth extraordin now . when a wom has fiv grown-up daught , she ought to giv ov think of her own beauty . '' `` in such cas , a wom has not oft much beauty to think of . '' `` but , my dear , you must indee go and see mr. bingley when he com into the neighbo . '' `` it is mor than i eng for , i ass you . '' `` but consid yo daught . on think what an est it would be for on of them . sir william and lady luca ar determin to go , mer on that account , for in gen , you know , they visit no newcom . indee you must go , for it wil be imposs for us to visit him if you do not . '' `` you ar over-scrupulous , sur . i dar say mr. bingley wil be very glad to see you ; and i wil send a few lin by you to ass him of my hearty cons to his marry whichev he choos of the girl ; though i must throw in a good word for my littl lizzy . '' `` i desir you wil do no such thing . lizzy is not a bit bet than the oth ; and i am sur she is not half so handsom as jan , nor half so good-humour as lyd . but you ar alway giv her the pref . '' `` they hav non of them much to recommend them , '' reply he ; `` they ar al sil and ign lik oth girl ; but lizzy has someth mor of quick than her sist . '' `` mr. bennet , how can you abus yo own childr in such a way ? you tak delight in vex me . you hav no compass for my poor nerv . '' `` you mistak me , my dear . i hav a high respect for yo nerv . they ar my old friend . i hav heard you ment them with consid thes last twenty year at least . '' `` ah , you do not know what i suff . '' `` but i hop you wil get ov it , and liv to see many young men of four thousand a year com into the neighbo . '' `` it wil be no us to us , if twenty such should com , sint you wil not visit them . '' `` depend upon it , my dear , that when ther ar twenty , i wil visit them al . '' mr. bennet was so od a mixt of quick part , sarcast humo , reserv , and capr , that the expery of three-and-twenty year had been insufficy to mak his wif understand his charact . her mind was less difficult to develop . she was a wom of mean understand , littl inform , and uncertain temp . when she was discont , she fant herself nerv . the busy of her lif was to get her daught marry ; it solac was visit and new . chapt 2 mr. bennet was among the earliest of thos who wait on mr. bingley . he had alway intend to visit him , though to the last alway ass his wif that he should not go ; and til the ev aft the visit was paid she had no knowledg of it . it was then disclos in the follow man . observ his second daught employ in trim a hat , he sud address her with : '' i hop mr. bingley wil lik it , lizzy . '' `` we ar not in a way to know what mr. bingley lik , '' said her moth res , `` sint we ar not to visit . '' `` but you forget , mamm , '' said elizabe , `` that we shal meet him at the assembl , and that mrs. long prom to introduc him . '' `` i do not believ mrs. long wil do any such thing . she has two niec of her own . she is a self , hypocrit wom , and i hav no opin of her . '' `` no mor hav i , '' said mr. bennet ; `` and i am glad to find that you do not depend on her serv you . '' mrs. bennet deign not to mak any reply , but , un to contain herself , beg scold on of her daught . `` do n't keep cough so , kitty , for heav 's sak ! hav a littl compass on my nerv . you tear them to piec . '' `` kitty has no discret in her cough , '' said her fath ; `` she tim them ill. '' '' i do not cough for my own amus , '' reply kitty fret . `` when is yo next bal to be , lizzy ? '' `` to-morrow fortnight . '' `` ay , so it is , '' cri her moth , `` and mrs. long doe not com back til the day bef ; so it wil be imposs for her to introduc him , for she wil not know him herself . '' `` then , my dear , you may hav the adv of yo friend , and introduc mr. bingley to her . '' `` imposs , mr. bennet , imposs , when i am not acquaint with him myself ; how can you be so teas ? '' `` i hono yo circumspect . a fortnight 's acquaint is certain very littl . on can not know what a man real is by the end of a fortnight . but if we do not vent somebody els wil ; and aft al , mrs. long and her niec must stand their chant ; and , theref , as she wil think it an act of kind , if you declin the off , i wil tak it on myself . '' the girl star at their fath . mrs. bennet said on , `` nonsens , nonsens ! '' `` what can be the mean of that emph exclam ? '' cri he . `` do you consid the form of introduc , and the stress that is laid on them , as nonsens ? i can not quit agr with you ther . what say you , mary ? for you ar a young lady of deep reflect , i know , and read gre book and mak extract . '' mary wish to say someth sens , but knew not how . `` whil mary is adjust her idea , '' he continu , `` let us return to mr . bingley . '' `` i am sick of mr. bingley , '' cri his wif . `` i am sorry to hear that ; but why did not you tel me that bef ? if i had known as much thi morn i certain would not hav cal on him . it is very unlucky ; but as i hav act paid the visit , we can not escap the acquaint now . '' the aston of the lady was just what he wish ; that of mrs. bennet perhap surpass the rest ; though , when the first tumult of joy was ov , she beg to decl that it was what she had expect al the whil . `` how good it was in you , my dear mr. bennet ! but i knew i should persuad you at last . i was sur you lov yo girl too wel to neglect such an acquaint . wel , how pleas i am ! and it is such a good jok , too , that you should hav gon thi morn and nev said a word about it til now . '' `` now , kitty , you may cough as much as you choos , '' said mr. bennet ; and , as he spok , he left the room , fatigu with the rapt of his wif . `` what an excel fath you hav , girl ! '' said she , when the door was shut . `` i do not know how you wil ev mak him amend for his kind ; or me , eith , for that mat . at our tim of lif it is not so pleas , i can tel you , to be mak new acquaint every day ; but for yo sak , we would do anyth . lyd , my lov , though you ar the youngest , i dar say mr. bingley wil dant with you at the next bal . '' `` oh ! '' said lyd stout , `` i am not afraid ; for though i am the youngest , i 'm the tallest . '' the rest of the ev was spent in conject how soon he would return mr. bennet 's visit , and determin when they should ask him to din . chapt 3 not al that mrs. bennet , howev , with the assist of her fiv daught , could ask on the subject , was sufficy to draw from her husband any satisfact describ of mr. bingley . they attack him in vary ways—with barefac quest , ingeny supposit , and dist surm ; but he elud the skil of them al , and they wer at last oblig to acceiv the second-hand intellig of their neighbo , lady luca . her report was high favo . sir william had been delight with him . he was quit young , wond handsom , extrem agr , and , to crown the whol , he meant to be at the next assembl with a larg party . noth could be mor delight ! to be fond of dant was a certain step toward fal in lov ; and very liv hop of mr. bingley 's heart wer entertain . `` if i can but see on of my daught happy settl at netherfield , '' said mrs. bennet to her husband , `` and al the oth eq wel marry , i shal hav noth to wish for . '' in a few day mr. bingley return mr. bennet 's visit , and sat about ten minut with him in his libr . he had entertain hop of being admit to a sight of the young lady , of whos beauty he had heard much ; but he saw on the fath . the lady wer somewh mor fortun , for they had the adv of ascertain from an up window that he wor a blu coat , and rod a black hors . an invit to din was soon afterward dispatch ; and already had mrs. bennet plan the cours that wer to do credit to her housekeep , when an answ ar which defer it al . mr. bingley was oblig to be in town the follow day , and , consequ , un to acceiv the hono of their invit , etc . mrs. bennet was quit disconcert . she could not imagin what busy he could hav in town so soon aft his ar in hertfordshir ; and she beg to fear that he might be alway fly about from on plac to anoth , and nev settl at netherfield as he ought to be . lady luca quiet her fear a littl by start the ide of his being gon to london on to get a larg party for the bal ; and a report soon follow that mr. bingley was to bring twelv lady and sev gentlem with him to the assembl . the girl griev ov such a numb of lady , but wer comfort the day bef the bal by hear , that instead of twelv he brought on six with him from london—his fiv sist and a cousin . and when the party ent the assembl room it consist of on fiv altogether—mr . bingley , his two sist , the husband of the eldest , and anoth young man . mr. bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlik ; he had a pleas count , and easy , unaffect man . his sist wer fin wom , with an air of decid fash . his brother-in-law , mr. hurst , mer look the gentlem ; but his friend mr. darcy soon drew the at of the room by his fin , tal person , handsom feat , nobl mien , and the report which was in gen circ within fiv minut aft his ent , of his hav ten thousand a year . the gentlem pronount him to be a fin fig of a man , the lady decl he was much handsom than mr. bingley , and he was look at with gre admir for about half the ev , til his man gav a disgust which turn the tid of his popul ; for he was discov to be proud ; to be abov his company , and abov being pleas ; and not al his larg est in derbyshir could then sav him from hav a most forbid , disagr count , and being unworthy to be comp with his friend . mr. bingley had soon mad himself acquaint with al the princip peopl in the room ; he was liv and unreserv , dant every dant , was angry that the bal clos so ear , and talk of giv on himself at netherfield . such amy qual must speak for themselv . what a contrast between him and his friend ! mr. darcy dant on ont with mrs. hurst and ont with miss bingley , declin being introduc to any oth lady , and spent the rest of the ev in walk about the room , speak occas to on of his own party . his charact was decid . he was the proudest , most disagr man in the world , and everybody hop that he would nev com ther again . amongst the most viol against him was mrs. bennet , whos dislik of his gen behavio was sharp into particul res by his hav slight on of her daught . elizabe bennet had been oblig , by the scarc of gentlem , to sit down for two dant ; and dur part of that tim , mr. darcy had been stand near enough for her to hear a convers between him and mr. bingley , who cam from the dant for a few minut , to press his friend to join it . `` com , darcy , '' said he , `` i must hav you dant . i hat to see you stand about by yourself in thi stupid man . you had much bet dant . '' `` i certain shal not . you know how i detest it , unless i am particul acquaint with my partn . at such an assembl as thi it would be insupport . yo sist ar eng , and ther is not anoth wom in the room whom it would not be a pun to me to stand up with . '' `` i would not be so fastidy as you ar , '' cri mr. bingley , `` for a kingdom ! upon my hono , i nev met with so many pleas girl in my lif as i hav thi ev ; and ther ar sev of them you see uncommon pretty . '' `` you ar dant with the on handsom girl in the room , '' said mr. darcy , look at the eldest miss bennet . `` oh ! she is the most beauty cre i ev beheld ! but ther is on of her sist sit down just behind you , who is very pretty , and i dar say very agr . do let me ask my partn to introduc you . '' `` which do you mean ? '' and turn round he look for a mom at elizabe , til catch her ey , he withdrew his own and cold said : `` she is tol , but not handsom enough to tempt me ; i am in no humo at pres to giv consequ to young lady who ar slight by oth men . you had bet return to yo partn and enjoy her smil , for you ar wast yo tim with me . '' mr. bingley follow his adv . mr. darcy walk off ; and elizabe remain with no very cord feel toward him . she told the story , howev , with gre spirit among her friend ; for she had a liv , play disposit , which delight in anyth ridic . the ev altogeth pass off pleas to the whol famy . mrs. bennet had seen her eldest daught much admir by the netherfield party . mr. bingley had dant with her twic , and she had been distinct by his sist . jan was as much grat by thi as her moth could be , though in a quiet way . elizabe felt jan 's pleas . mary had heard herself ment to miss bingley as the most accompl girl in the neighbo ; and catherin and lyd had been fortun enough nev to be without partn , which was al that they had yet learnt to car for at a bal . they return , theref , in good spirit to longbourn , the vil wher they liv , and of which they wer the princip inhabit . they found mr. bennet stil up . with a book he was regardless of tim ; and on the pres occas he had a good deal of curios as to the ev of an ev which had rais such splendid expect . he had rath hop that his wif 's view on the stranger would be disappoint ; but he soon found out that he had a diff story to hear . `` oh ! my dear mr. bennet , '' as she ent the room , `` we hav had a most delight ev , a most excel bal . i wish you had been ther . jan was so admir , noth could be lik it . everybody said how wel she look ; and mr. bingley thought her quit beauty , and dant with her twic ! on think of that , my dear ; he act dant with her twic ! and she was the on cre in the room that he ask a second tim . first of al , he ask miss luca . i was so vex to see him stand up with her ! but , howev , he did not admir her at al ; indee , nobody can , you know ; and he seem quit struck with jan as she was going down the dant . so he inquir who she was , and got introduc , and ask her for the two next . then the two third he dant with miss king , and the two four with mar luca , and the two fif with jan again , and the two six with lizzy , and the boulanger— '' '' if he had had any compass for me , '' cri her husband impaty , `` he would not hav dant half so much ! for god 's sak , say no mor of his partn . oh that he had sprained his ankl in the first dant ! '' `` oh ! my dear , i am quit delight with him . he is so excess handsom ! and his sist ar charm wom . i nev in my lif saw anyth mor eleg than their dress . i dar say the lac upon mrs. hurst 's gown— '' her she was interrupt again . mr. bennet protest against any describ of finery . she was theref oblig to seek anoth branch of the subject , and rel , with much bit of spirit and som exag , the shock rud of mr. darcy . `` but i can ass you , '' she ad , `` that lizzy doe not los much by not suit his fant ; for he is a most disagr , horrid man , not at al wor pleas . so high and so conceit that ther was no end him ! he walk her , and he walk ther , fant himself so very gre ! not handsom enough to dant with ! i wish you had been ther , my dear , to hav giv him on of yo set-downs . i quit detest the man . '' chapt 4 when jan and elizabe wer alon , the form , who had been cauty in her pra of mr. bingley bef , express to her sist just how very much she admir him . `` he is just what a young man ought to be , '' said she , `` sens , good-humour , liv ; and i nev saw such happy man ! —so much eas , with such perfect good bree ! '' `` he is also handsom , '' reply elizabe , `` which a young man ought likew to be , if he poss can . his charact is thereby complet . '' `` i was very much flat by his ask me to dant a second tim . i did not expect such a comply . '' `` did not you ? i did for you . but that is on gre diff between us . comply alway tak you by surpr , and me nev . what could be mor nat than his ask you again ? he could not help see that you wer about fiv tim as pretty as every oth wom in the room . no thank to his gallantry for that . wel , he certain is very agr , and i giv you leav to lik him . you hav lik many a stupid person . '' `` dear lizzy ! '' `` oh ! you ar a gre deal too apt , you know , to lik peopl in gen . you nev see a fault in anybody . al the world ar good and agr in yo ey . i nev heard you speak il of a hum being in yo lif . '' `` i would not wish to be hasty in cens anyon ; but i alway speak what i think . '' `` i know you do ; and it is that which mak the wond . with yo good sens , to be so honest blind to the fol and nonsens of oth ! affect of cando is common enough—one meet with it everywh . but to be candid without ost or design—to tak the good of everybody 's charact and mak it stil bet , and say noth of the bad—belongs to you alon . and so you lik thi man 's sist , too , do you ? their man ar not eq to his . '' `` certain not— first . but they ar very pleas wom when you convers with them . miss bingley is to liv with her broth , and keep his hous ; and i am much mistak if we shal not find a very charm neighbo in her . '' elizabe list in sil , but was not convint ; their behavio at the assembl had not been calc to pleas in gen ; and with mor quick of observ and less pli of temp than her sist , and with a judg too unassail by any at to herself , she was very littl dispos to approv them . they wer in fact very fin lady ; not deficy in good humo when they wer pleas , nor in the pow of mak themselv agr when they chos it , but proud and conceit . they wer rath handsom , had been educ in on of the first priv semin in town , had a fortun of twenty thousand pound , wer in the habit of spend mor than they ought , and of assocy with peopl of rank , and wer theref in every respect entitl to think wel of themselv , and mean of oth . they wer of a respect famy in the nor of england ; a circumst mor deeply impress on their mem than that their broth 's fortun and their own had been acquir by trad . mr. bingley inherit property to the amount of near a hundr thousand pound from his fath , who had intend to purchas an est , but did not liv to do it . mr. bingley intend it likew , and sometim mad cho of his county ; but as he was now provid with a good hous and the liberty of a man , it was doubt to many of thos who best knew the easy of his temp , wheth he might not spend the remaind of his day at netherfield , and leav the next gen to purchas . his sist wer anxy for his hav an est of his own ; but , though he was now on est as a ten , miss bingley was by no mean unwil to presid at his table—nor was mrs. hurst , who had marry a man of mor fash than fortun , less dispos to consid his hous as her hom when it suit her . mr. bingley had not been of ag two year , when he was tempt by an accid recommend to look at netherfield hous . he did look at it , and into it for half-an-hour—was pleas with the situ and the princip room , satisfy with what the own said in it pra , and took it immedy . between him and darcy ther was a very steady friend , in spit of gre opposit of charact . bingley was endear to darcy by the easy , op , and ductil of his temp , though no disposit could off a gre contrast to his own , and though with his own he nev appear dissatisfy . on the strength of darcy 's regard , bingley had the firmest rely , and of his judg the highest opin . in understand , darcy was the supery . bingley was by no mean deficy , but darcy was clev . he was at the sam tim haughty , reserv , and fastidy , and his man , though well-bred , wer not invit . in that respect his friend had gre the adv . bingley was sur of being lik wherev he appear , darcy was contin giv offens . the man in which they spok of the meryton assembl was sufficy charact . bingley had nev met with mor pleas peopl or pretty girl in his lif ; everybody had been most kind and at to him ; ther had been no form , no stiff ; he had soon felt acquaint with al the room ; and , as to miss bennet , he could not conceiv an angel mor beauty . darcy , on the cont , had seen a collect of peopl in whom ther was littl beauty and no fash , for non of whom he had felt the smallest interest , and from non receiv eith at or pleas . miss bennet he acknowledg to be pretty , but she smil too much . mrs. hurst and her sist allow it to be so—but stil they admir her and lik her , and pronount her to be a sweet girl , and on whom they would not object to know mor of . miss bennet was theref est as a sweet girl , and their broth felt auth by such commend to think of her as he chos . chapt 5 within a short walk of longbourn liv a famy with whom the bennet wer particul intim . sir william luca had been form in trad in meryton , wher he had mad a tol fortun , and ris to the hono of knight by an address to the king dur his mayoral . the distinct had perhap been felt too strongly . it had giv him a disgust to his busy , and to his resid in a smal market town ; and , in quit them both , he had remov with his famy to a hous about a mil from meryton , denomin from that period luca lodg , wher he could think with pleas of his own import , and , unshackl by busy , occupy himself sol in being civil to al the world . for , though el by his rank , it did not rend him supercy ; on the cont , he was al at to everybody . by nat inoffend , friend , and oblig , his pres at st. jam 's had mad him court . lady luca was a very good kind of wom , not too clev to be a valu neighbo to mrs. bennet . they had sev childr . the eldest of them , a sens , intellig young wom , about twenty-seven , was elizabe 's intim friend . that the miss lucas and the miss bennet should meet to talk ov a bal was absolv necess ; and the morn aft the assembl brought the form to longbourn to hear and to commun . `` you beg the ev wel , charlot , '' said mrs. bennet with civil self-command to miss luca . `` you wer mr. bingley 's first cho . '' `` ye ; but he seem to lik his second bet . '' `` oh ! you mean jan , i suppos , becaus he dant with her twic . to be sur that did seem as if he admir her—indeed i rath believ he did—i heard someth about it—but i hard know what—something about mr . robinson . '' `` perhap you mean what i overheard between him and mr. robinson ; did not i ment it to you ? mr. robinson 's ask him how he lik our meryton assembl , and wheth he did not think ther wer a gre many pretty wom in the room , and which he thought the prettiest ? and his answ immedy to the last quest : 'oh ! the eldest miss bennet , beyond a doubt ; ther can not be two opin on that point . ' '' `` upon my word ! wel , that is very decid indeed—that doe seem as if—but , howev , it may al com to noth , you know . '' `` my overhear wer mor to the purpos than yo , eliz , '' said charlot . `` mr. darcy is not so wel wor list to as his friend , is he ? —poor eliz ! —to be on just tol . '' `` i beg you would not put it into lizzy 's head to be vex by his ill-treatment , for he is such a disagr man , that it would be quit a misfortun to be lik by him . mrs. long told me last night that he sat clos to her for half-an-hour without ont op his lip . '' `` ar you quit sur , ma'am ? —is not ther a littl mistak ? '' said jan . `` i certain saw mr. darcy speak to her . '' `` aye—becaus she ask him at last how he lik netherfield , and he could not help answ her ; but she said he seem quit angry at being spok to . '' `` miss bingley told me , '' said jan , `` that he nev speak much , unless among his intim acquaint . with them he is remark agr . '' `` i do not believ a word of it , my dear . if he had been so very agr , he would hav talk to mrs. long . but i can guess how it was ; everybody say that he is eat up with prid , and i dar say he had heard somehow that mrs. long doe not keep a carry , and had com to the bal in a hack cha . '' `` i do not mind his not talk to mrs. long , '' said miss luca , `` but i wish he had dant with eliz . '' `` anoth tim , lizzy , '' said her moth , `` i would not dant with him , if i wer you . '' `` i believ , ma'am , i may saf prom you nev to dant with him . '' `` his prid , '' said miss luca , `` doe not offend me so much as prid oft doe , becaus ther is an excus for it . on can not wond that so very fin a young man , with famy , fortun , everyth in his favo , should think high of himself . if i may so express it , he has a right to be proud . '' `` that is very tru , '' reply elizabe , `` and i could easy forg his prid , if he had not mort min . '' `` prid , '' observ mary , who piqu herself upon the solid of her reflect , `` is a very common fail , i believ . by al that i hav ev read , i am convint that it is very common indee ; that hum nat is particul pron to it , and that ther ar very few of us who do not cher a feel of self-complacency on the scor of som qual or oth , real or imagin . van and prid ar diff thing , though the word ar oft us synonym . a person may be proud without being vain . prid rel mor to our opin of ourselv , van to what we would hav oth think of us . '' `` if i wer as rich as mr. darcy , '' cri a young luca , who cam with his sist , `` i should not car how proud i was . i would keep a pack of foxhound , and drink a bottl of win a day . '' `` then you would drink a gre deal mor than you ought , '' said mrs. bennet ; `` and if i wer to see you at it , i should tak away yo bottl direct . '' the boy protest that she should not ; she continu to decl that she would , and the argu end on with the visit . chapt 6 the lady of longbourn soon wait on thos of netherfield . the visit was soon return in due form . miss bennet 's pleas man grew on the goodwil of mrs. hurst and miss bingley ; and though the moth was found to be intol , and the young sist not wor speak to , a wish of being bet acquaint with them was express toward the two eldest . by jan , thi at was receiv with the greatest pleas , but elizabe stil saw supercy in their tre of everybody , hard exceiv ev her sist , and could not lik them ; though their kind to jan , such as it was , had a valu as ar in al prob from the influ of their broth 's admir . it was gen evid whenev they met , that he did admir her and to her it was eq evid that jan was yield to the pref which she had begun to entertain for him from the first , and was in a way to be very much in lov ; but she consid with pleas that it was not lik to be discov by the world in gen , sint jan unit , with gre strength of feel , a compos of temp and a uniform che of man which would guard her from the susp of the impertin . she ment thi to her friend miss luca . `` it may perhap be pleas , '' reply charlot , `` to be abl to impos on the publ in such a cas ; but it is sometim a disadv to be so very guard . if a wom cont her affect with the sam skil from the object of it , she may los the opportun of fix him ; and it wil then be but poor consol to believ the world eq in the dark . ther is so much of gratitud or van in almost every attach , that it is not saf to leav any to itself . we can al begin freely—a slight pref is nat enough ; but ther ar very few of us who hav heart enough to be real in lov without enco . in nin cas out of ten a wom had bet show mor affect than she feel . bingley lik yo sist undoubt ; but he may nev do mor than lik her , if she doe not help him on . '' `` but she doe help him on , as much as her nat wil allow . if i can perceiv her regard for him , he must be a simpleton , indee , not to discov it too . '' `` rememb , eliz , that he doe not know jan 's disposit as you do . '' `` but if a wom is part to a man , and doe not endeavo to cont it , he must find it out . '' `` perhap he must , if he see enough of her . but , though bingley and jan meet tol oft , it is nev for many hour togeth ; and , as they alway see each oth in larg mix party , it is imposs that every mom should be employ in convers togeth . jan should theref mak the most of every half-hour in which she can command his at . when she is sec of him , ther wil be mor leis for fal in lov as much as she choos . '' `` yo plan is a good on , '' reply elizabe , `` wher noth is in quest but the desir of being wel marry , and if i wer determin to get a rich husband , or any husband , i dar say i should adopt it . but thes ar not jan 's feel ; she is not act by design . as yet , she can not ev be certain of the degr of her own regard nor of it reason . she has known him on a fortnight . she dant four dant with him at meryton ; she saw him on morn at his own hous , and has sint din with him in company four tim . thi is not quit enough to mak her understand his charact . '' `` not as you repres it . had she mer din with him , she might on hav discov wheth he had a good appetit ; but you must rememb that four ev hav also been spent together—and four ev may do a gre deal . '' `` ye ; thes four ev hav en them to ascertain that they both lik vingt-un bet than commerc ; but with respect to any oth lead charact , i do not imagin that much has been unfold . '' `` wel , '' said charlot , `` i wish jan success with al my heart ; and if she wer marry to him to-morrow , i should think she had as good a chant of happy as if she wer to be study his charact for a twelvemon . happy in marry is entir a mat of chant . if the disposit of the party ar ev so wel known to each oth or ev so simil beforehand , it doe not adv their fel in the least . they alway continu to grow sufficy unlik afterward to hav their shar of vex ; and it is bet to know as littl as poss of the defect of the person with whom you ar to pass yo lif . '' `` you mak me laugh , charlot ; but it is not sound . you know it is not sound , and that you would nev act in thi way yourself . '' occupy in observ mr. bingley 's at to her sist , elizabe was far from suspect that she was herself becom an object of som interest in the ey of his friend . mr. darcy had at first scarc allow her to be pretty ; he had look at her without admir at the bal ; and when they next met , he look at her on to crit . but no soon had he mad it clear to himself and his friend that she hard had a good feat in her fac , than he beg to find it was rend uncommon intellig by the beauty express of her dark ey . to thi discovery success som oth eq mort . though he had detect with a crit ey mor than on fail of perfect symmetry in her form , he was forc to acknowledg her fig to be light and pleas ; and in spit of his assert that her man wer not thos of the fash world , he was caught by their easy play . of thi she was perfect unaw ; to her he was on the man who mad himself agr nowh , and who had not thought her handsom enough to dant with . he beg to wish to know mor of her , and as a step toward convers with her himself , attend to her convers with oth . his doing so drew her not . it was at sir william luca 's , wher a larg party wer assembl . `` what doe mr. darcy mean , '' said she to charlot , `` by list to my convers with colonel forst ? '' `` that is a quest which mr. darcy on can answ . '' `` but if he doe it any mor i shal certain let him know that i see what he is about . he has a very satir ey , and if i do not begin by being impertin myself , i shal soon grow afraid of him . '' on his approach them soon afterward , though without seem to hav any int of speak , miss luca defy her friend to ment such a subject to him ; which immedy provok elizabe to do it , she turn to him and said : '' did you not think , mr. darcy , that i express myself uncommon wel just now , when i was teas colonel forst to giv us a bal at meryton ? '' `` with gre energy ; but it is alway a subject which mak a lady energet . '' `` you ar sev on us . '' `` it wil be her turn soon to be teas , '' said miss luca . `` i am going to op the instru , eliz , and you know what follow . '' `` you ar a very strange cre by way of a friend ! —always want me to play and sing bef anybody and everybody ! if my van had tak a mus turn , you would hav been invalu ; but as it is , i would real rath not sit down bef thos who must be in the habit of hear the very best perform . '' on miss luca 's persev , howev , she ad , `` very wel , if it must be so , it must . '' and grav glant at mr. darcy , `` ther is a fin old say , which everybody her is of cours famili with : 'keep yo brea to cool yo porridg ' ; and i shal keep min to swel my song . '' her perform was pleas , though by no mean capit . aft a song or two , and bef she could reply to the entreaty of sev that she would sing again , she was eag success at the instru by her sist mary , who hav , in consequ of being the on plain on in the famy , work hard for knowledg and accompl , was alway impaty for display . mary had neith geni nor tast ; and though van had giv her apply , it had giv her likew a ped air and conceit man , which would hav ind a high degr of excel than she had reach . elizabe , easy and unaffect , had been list to with much mor pleas , though not play half so wel ; and mary , at the end of a long concerto , was glad to purchas pra and gratitud by scotch and ir air , at the request of her young sist , who , with som of the lucas , and two or three off , join eag in dant at on end of the room . mr. darcy stood near them in sil indign at such a mod of pass the ev , to the exclud of al convers , and was too much engross by his thought to perceiv that sir william luca was his neighbo , til sir william thu beg : '' what a charm amus for young peopl thi is , mr. darcy ! ther is noth lik dant aft al . i consid it as on of the first refin of pol socy . '' `` certain , sir ; and it has the adv also of being in vog amongst the less pol socy of the world . every sav can dant . '' sir william on smil . `` yo friend perform delight , '' he continu aft a paus , on see bingley join the group ; `` and i doubt not that you ar an adept in the sci yourself , mr . darcy . '' `` you saw me dant at meryton , i believ , sir . '' `` ye , indee , and receiv no inconsid pleas from the sight . do you oft dant at st . jam 's ? '' `` nev , sir . '' `` do you not think it would be a prop comply to the plac ? '' `` it is a comply which i nev pay to any plac if i can avoid it . '' `` you hav a hous in town , i conclud ? '' mr. darcy bow . `` i had ont had som thought of fix in town myself—for i am fond of supery socy ; but i did not feel quit certain that the air of london would agr with lady luca . '' he paus in hop of an answ ; but his comp was not dispos to mak any ; and elizabe at that inst mov toward them , he was struck with the act of doing a very gal thing , and cal out to her : '' my dear miss eliz , why ar you not dant ? mr. darcy , you must allow me to pres thi young lady to you as a very desir partn . you can not refus to dant , i am sur when so much beauty is bef you . '' and , tak her hand , he would hav giv it to mr. darcy who , though extrem surpr , was not unwil to receiv it , when she inst drew back , and said with som discompos to sir william : '' indee , sir , i hav not the least int of dant . i ent you not to suppos that i mov thi way in ord to beg for a partn . '' mr. darcy , with grav propry , request to be allow the hono of her hand , but in vain . elizabe was determin ; nor did sir william at al shak her purpos by his attempt at persuas . `` you excel so much in the dant , miss eliz , that it is cruel to deny me the happy of see you ; and though thi gentlem dislik the amus in gen , he can hav no object , i am sur , to oblig us for on half-hour . '' `` mr. darcy is al polit , '' said elizabe , smil . `` he is , indee ; but , consid the induc , my dear miss eliz , we can not wond at his complaisance—for who would object to such a partn ? '' elizabe look arch , and turn away . her resist had not ind her with the gentlem , and he was think of her with som complac , when thu accost by miss bingley : '' i can guess the subject of yo revery . '' `` i should imagin not . '' `` you ar consid how insupport it would be to pass many ev in thi manner—in such socy ; and indee i am quit of yo opin . i was nev mor annoy ! the insipid , and yet the noise—th noth , and yet the self-importance of al thos peopl ! what would i giv to hear yo strictures on them ! '' `` yo conject is tot wrong , i ass you . my mind was mor agr eng . i hav been medit on the very gre pleas which a pair of fin ey in the fac of a pretty wom can bestow . '' miss bingley immedy fix her ey on his fac , and desir he would tel her what lady had the credit of inspir such reflect . mr. darcy reply with gre intrepid : '' miss elizabe bennet . '' `` miss elizabe bennet ! '' rep miss bingley . `` i am al aston . how long has she been such a favourit ? —and pray , when am i to wish you joy ? '' `` that is exact the quest which i expect you to ask . a lady 's imagin is very rapid ; it jump from admir to lov , from lov to matrimony , in a mom . i knew you would be wish me joy . '' `` nay , if you ar sery about it , i shal consid the mat is absolv settl . you wil be hav a charm mother-in-law , indee ; and , of cours , she wil alway be at pemberley with you . '' he list to her with perfect indiff whil she chos to entertain herself in thi man ; and as his compos convint her that al was saf , her wit flow long . chapt 7 mr. bennet 's property consist almost entir in an est of two thousand a year , which , unfortun for his daught , was entail , in default of heir mal , on a dist rel ; and their moth 's fortun , though ampl for her situ in lif , could but il supply the deficy of his . her fath had been an attorney in meryton , and had left her four thousand pound . she had a sist marry to a mr. phillip , who had been a clerk to their fath and success him in the busy , and a broth settl in london in a respect lin of trad . the vil of longbourn was on on mil from meryton ; a most conveny dist for the young lady , who wer us tempt thith three or four tim a week , to pay their duty to their aunt and to a millin 's shop just ov the way . the two youngest of the famy , catherin and lyd , wer particul frequ in thes at ; their mind wer mor vac than their sist ' , and when noth bet off , a walk to meryton was necess to amus their morn hour and furn convers for the ev ; and howev bar of new the country in gen might be , they alway cont to learn som from their aunt . at pres , indee , they wer wel supply both with new and happy by the rec ar of a milit regy in the neighbo ; it was to remain the whol wint , and meryton was the headquart . their visit to mrs. phillip wer now produc of the most interest intellig . every day ad someth to their knowledg of the off ' nam and connect . their lodg wer not long a secret , and at leng they beg to know the off themselv . mr. phillip visit them al , and thi op to his niec a stor of fel unknown bef . they could talk of noth but off ; and mr. bingley 's larg fortun , the ment of which gav anim to their moth , was worthless in their ey when oppos to the regy of an ensign . aft list on morn to their effus on thi subject , mr. bennet cool observ : '' from al that i can collect by yo man of talk , you must be two of the silliest girl in the country . i hav suspect it som tim , but i am now convint . '' catherin was disconcert , and mad no answ ; but lyd , with perfect indiff , continu to express her admir of captain cart , and her hop of see him in the cours of the day , as he was going the next morn to london . `` i am aston , my dear , '' said mrs. bennet , `` that you should be so ready to think yo own childr sil . if i wish to think slight of anybody 's childr , it should not be of my own , howev . '' `` if my childr ar sil , i must hop to be alway sens of it . '' `` yes—but as it hap , they ar al of them very clev . '' `` thi is the on point , i flat myself , on which we do not agr . i had hop that our senty coincid in every particul , but i must so far diff from you as to think our two youngest daught uncommon fool . '' `` my dear mr. bennet , you must not expect such girl to hav the sens of their fath and moth . when they get to our ag , i dar say they wil not think about off any mor than we do . i rememb the tim when i lik a red coat myself very well—and , indee , so i do stil at my heart ; and if a smart young colonel , with fiv or six thousand a year , should want on of my girl i shal not say nay to him ; and i thought colonel forst look very becom the oth night at sir william 's in his regy . '' `` mamm , '' cri lyd , `` my aunt say that colonel forst and captain cart do not go so oft to miss watson 's as they did when they first cam ; she see them now very oft stand in clark 's libr . '' mrs. bennet was prev reply by the ent of the footm with a not for miss bennet ; it cam from netherfield , and the serv wait for an answ . mrs. bennet 's ey sparkl with pleas , and she was eag cal out , whil her daught read , '' wel , jan , who is it from ? what is it about ? what doe he say ? wel , jan , mak hast and tel us ; mak hast , my lov . '' `` it is from miss bingley , '' said jan , and then read it aloud . `` my dear friend , — '' if you ar not so compass as to din to-day with louis and me , we shal be in dang of hat each oth for the rest of our liv , for a whol day 's tete-a-tet between two wom can nev end without a quarrel . com as soon as you can on receipt of thi . my broth and the gentlem ar to din with the officers.—your ev , '' carolin bingley '' '' with the off ! '' cri lyd . `` i wond my aunt did not tel us of that . '' `` din out , '' said mrs. bennet , `` that is very unlucky . '' `` can i hav the carry ? '' said jan . `` no , my dear , you had bet go on horseback , becaus it seem lik to rain ; and then you must stay al night . '' `` that would be a good scheme , '' said elizabe , `` if you wer sur that they would not off to send her hom . '' `` oh ! but the gentlem wil hav mr. bingley 's cha to go to meryton , and the hurst hav no hors to their . '' `` i had much rath go in the coach . '' `` but , my dear , yo fath can not spar the hors , i am sur . they ar want in the farm , mr. bennet , ar they not ? '' `` they ar want in the farm much oft than i can get them . '' `` but if you hav got them to-day , '' said elizabe , `` my moth 's purpos wil be answ . '' she did at last extort from her fath an acknowledg that the hors wer eng . jan was theref oblig to go on horseback , and her moth attend her to the door with many che prognost of a bad day . her hop wer answ ; jan had not been gon long bef it rain hard . her sist wer uneasy for her , but her moth was delight . the rain continu the whol ev without intermit ; jan certain could not com back . `` thi was a lucky ide of min , indee ! '' said mrs. bennet mor than ont , as if the credit of mak it rain wer al her own . til the next morn , howev , she was not aw of al the fel of her cont . breakfast was scarc ov when a serv from netherfield brought the follow not for elizabe : '' my dearest lizzy , — '' i find myself very unwel thi morn , which , i suppos , is to be imput to my get wet through yesterday . my kind friend wil not hear of my return til i am bet . they insist also on my see mr. jones—therefore do not be alarm if you should hear of his hav been to me—and , exceiv a sor throat and headach , ther is not much the mat with me.—yours , etc . '' `` wel , my dear , '' said mr. bennet , when elizabe had read the not aloud , `` if yo daught should hav a dang fit of illness—if she should die , it would be a comfort to know that it was al in pursuit of mr. bingley , and und yo ord . '' `` oh ! i am not afraid of her dying . peopl do not die of littl trifl cold . she wil be tak good car of . as long as she stay ther , it is al very wel . i would go and see her if i could hav the carry . '' elizabe , feel real anxy , was determin to go to her , though the carry was not to be had ; and as she was no horsewom , walk was her on altern . she decl her resolv . `` how can you be so sil , '' cri her moth , `` as to think of such a thing , in al thi dirt ! you wil not be fit to be seen when you get ther . '' `` i shal be very fit to see jane—which is al i want . '' `` is thi a hint to me , lizzy , '' said her fath , `` to send for the hors ? '' `` no , indee , i do not wish to avoid the walk . the dist is noth when on has a mot ; on three mil . i shal be back by din . '' `` i admir the act of yo benevol , '' observ mary , `` but every impuls of feel should be guid by reason ; and , in my opin , exert should alway be in proport to what is requir . '' `` we wil go as far as meryton with you , '' said catherin and lyd . elizabe acceiv their company , and the three young lady set off togeth . `` if we mak hast , '' said lyd , as they walk along , `` perhap we may see someth of captain cart bef he goe . '' in meryton they part ; the two youngest repair to the lodg of on of the off ' wiv , and elizabe continu her walk alon , cross field aft field at a quick pac , jump ov stil and springing ov puddl with impaty act , and find herself at last within view of the hous , with weary ankl , dirty stock , and a fac glow with the warm of exerc . she was shown into the breakfast-parlour , wher al but jan wer assembl , and wher her appear cre a gre deal of surpr . that she should hav walk three mil so ear in the day , in such dirty weath , and by herself , was almost incred to mrs. hurst and miss bingley ; and elizabe was convint that they held her in contempt for it . she was receiv , howev , very polit by them ; and in their broth 's man ther was someth bet than polit ; ther was good humo and kind . mr. darcy said very littl , and mr. hurst noth at al . the form was divid between admir of the bril which exerc had giv to her complect , and doubt as to the occas 's just her com so far alon . the lat was think on of his breakfast . her inquiry aft her sist wer not very favo answ . miss bennet had slept il , and though up , was very fev , and not wel enough to leav her room . elizabe was glad to be tak to her immedy ; and jan , who had on been withheld by the fear of giv alarm or inconveny from express in her not how much she long for such a visit , was delight at her ent . she was not eq , howev , to much convers , and when miss bingley left them togeth , could attempt littl besid express of gratitud for the extraordin kind she was tre with . elizabe sil attend her . when breakfast was ov they wer join by the sist ; and elizabe beg to lik them herself , when she saw how much affect and solicitud they show for jan . the apothec cam , and hav examin his paty , said , as might be suppos , that she had caught a viol cold , and that they must endeavo to get the bet of it ; adv her to return to bed , and prom her som draught . the adv was follow ready , for the fev symptom increas , and her head ach acut . elizabe did not quit her room for a mom ; nor wer the oth lady oft abs ; the gentlem being out , they had , in fact , noth to do elsewh . when the clock struck three , elizabe felt that she must go , and very unwil said so . miss bingley off her the carry , and she on want a littl press to acceiv it , when jan test such concern in part with her , that miss bingley was oblig to convert the off of the cha to an invit to remain at netherfield for the pres . elizabe most thank cons , and a serv was dispatch to longbourn to acquaint the famy with her stay and bring back a supply of cloth . chapt 8 at fiv o'clock the two lady retir to dress , and at half-past six elizabe was summon to din . to the civil inquiry which then pour in , and amongst which she had the pleas of distinct the much supery solicitud of mr. bingley 's , she could not mak a very favo answ . jan was by no mean bet . the sist , on hear thi , rep three or four tim how much they wer griev , how shock it was to hav a bad cold , and how excess they dislik being il themselv ; and then thought no mor of the mat : and their indiff toward jan when not immedy bef them rest elizabe to the enjoy of al her form dislik . their broth , indee , was the on on of the party whom she could regard with any complac . his anxy for jan was evid , and his at to herself most pleas , and they prev her feel herself so much an intrud as she believ she was consid by the oth . she had very littl not from any but him . miss bingley was engross by mr. darcy , her sist scarc less so ; and as for mr. hurst , by whom elizabe sat , he was an indol man , who liv on to eat , drink , and play at card ; who , when he found her to pref a plain dish to a ragout , had noth to say to her . when din was ov , she return direct to jan , and miss bingley beg abus her as soon as she was out of the room . her man wer pronount to be very bad indee , a mixt of prid and impertin ; she had no convers , no styl , no beauty . mrs. hurst thought the sam , and ad : '' she has noth , in short , to recommend her , but being an excel walk . i shal nev forget her appear thi morn . she real look almost wild . '' `` she did , indee , louis . i could hard keep my count . very nonsens to com at al ! why must she be scamp about the country , becaus her sist had a cold ? her hair , so untidy , so blowsy ! '' `` ye , and her pettico ; i hop you saw her pettico , six inch deep in mud , i am absolv certain ; and the gown which had been let down to hid it not doing it off . '' `` yo pict may be very exact , louis , '' said bingley ; `` but thi was al lost upon me . i thought miss elizabe bennet look remark wel when she cam into the room thi morn . her dirty pettico quit escap my not . '' `` you observ it , mr. darcy , i am sur , '' said miss bingley ; `` and i am inclin to think that you would not wish to see yo sist mak such an exhibit . '' `` certain not . '' `` to walk three mil , or four mil , or fiv mil , or whatev it is , abov her ankl in dirt , and alon , quit alon ! what could she mean by it ? it seem to me to show an abomin sort of conceit independ , a most country-town indiff to decor . '' `` it show an affect for her sist that is very pleas , '' said bingley . `` i am afraid , mr. darcy , '' observ miss bingley in a half whisp , `` that thi adv has rath affect yo admir of her fin ey . '' `` not at al , '' he reply ; `` they wer bright by the exerc . '' a short paus follow thi speech , and mrs. hurst beg again : '' i hav an excess regard for miss jan bennet , she is real a very sweet girl , and i wish with al my heart she wer wel settl . but with such a fath and moth , and such low connect , i am afraid ther is no chant of it . '' `` i think i hav heard you say that their unc is an attorney in meryton . '' `` ye ; and they hav anoth , who liv somewh near cheapsid . '' `` that is capit , '' ad her sist , and they both laugh hearty . `` if they had unc enough to fil al cheapsid , '' cri bingley , `` it would not mak them on jot less agr . '' `` but it must very mat less their chant of marry men of any consid in the world , '' reply darcy . to thi speech bingley mad no answ ; but his sist gav it their hearty ass , and indulg their mir for som tim at the expens of their dear friend 's vulg rel . with a renew of tend , howev , they return to her room on leav the dining-parlour , and sat with her til summon to coff . she was stil very poor , and elizabe would not quit her at al , til lat in the ev , when she had the comfort of see her sleep , and when it seem to her rath right than pleas that she should go downstair herself . on ent the drawing-room she found the whol party at loo , and was immedy invit to join them ; but suspect them to be play high she declin it , and mak her sist the excus , said she would amus herself for the short tim she could stay below , with a book . mr. hurst look at her with aston . `` do you pref read to card ? '' said he ; `` that is rath singul . '' `` miss eliz bennet , '' said miss bingley , `` desp card . she is a gre read , and has no pleas in anyth els . '' `` i deserv neith such pra nor such cens , '' cri elizabe ; `` i am not a gre read , and i hav pleas in many thing . '' `` in nurs yo sist i am sur you hav pleas , '' said bingley ; `` and i hop it wil be soon increas by see her quit wel . '' elizabe thank him from her heart , and then walk toward the tabl wher a few book wer lying . he immedy off to fetch her others—all that his libr afford . `` and i wish my collect wer larg for yo benefit and my own credit ; but i am an idl fellow , and though i hav not many , i hav mor than i ev look into . '' elizabe ass him that she could suit herself perfect with thos in the room . `` i am aston , '' said miss bingley , `` that my fath should hav left so smal a collect of book . what a delight libr you hav at pemberley , mr . darcy ! '' `` it ought to be good , '' he reply , `` it has been the work of many gen . '' `` and then you hav ad so much to it yourself , you ar alway buy book . '' `` i can not comprehend the neglect of a famy libr in such day as thes . '' `` neglect ! i am sur you neglect noth that can ad to the beauty of that nobl plac . charl , when you build yo hous , i wish it may be half as delight as pemberley . '' `` i wish it may . '' `` but i would real adv you to mak yo purchas in that neighbo , and tak pemberley for a kind of model . ther is not a fin county in england than derbyshir . '' `` with al my heart ; i wil buy pemberley itself if darcy wil sel it . '' `` i am talk of poss , charl . '' `` upon my word , carolin , i should think it mor poss to get pemberley by purchas than by imit . '' elizabe was so much caught with what pass , as to leav her very littl at for her book ; and soon lay it whol asid , she drew near the card-table , and stat herself between mr. bingley and his eldest sist , to observ the gam . `` is miss darcy much grown sint the spring ? '' said miss bingley ; `` wil she be as tal as i am ? '' `` i think she wil . she is now about miss elizabe bennet 's height , or rath tal . '' `` how i long to see her again ! i nev met with anybody who delight me so much . such a count , such man ! and so extrem accompl for her ag ! her perform on the pianofort is exquisit . '' `` it is amaz to me , '' said bingley , `` how young lady can hav paty to be so very accompl as they al ar . '' `` al young lady accompl ! my dear charl , what do you mean ? '' `` ye , al of them , i think . they al paint tabl , cov screens , and net purs . i scarc know anyon who can not do al thi , and i am sur i nev heard a young lady spok of for the first tim , without being inform that she was very accompl . '' `` yo list of the common ext of accompl , '' said darcy , `` has too much tru . the word is apply to many a wom who deserv it no otherw than by net a purs or cov a screen . but i am very far from agr with you in yo estim of lady in gen . i can not boast of know mor than half-a-dozen , in the whol rang of my acquaint , that ar real accompl . '' `` nor i , i am sur , '' said miss bingley . `` then , '' observ elizabe , `` you must comprehend a gre deal in yo ide of an accompl wom . '' `` ye , i do comprehend a gre deal in it . '' `` oh ! certain , '' cri his faith assist , `` no on can be real esteem accompl who doe not gre surpass what is us met with . a wom must hav a thorough knowledg of mus , sing , draw , dant , and the modern langu , to deserv the word ; and besid al thi , she must possess a certain someth in her air and man of walk , the ton of her voic , her address and express , or the word wil be but half-deserved . '' `` al thi she must possess , '' ad darcy , `` and to al thi she must yet ad someth mor subst , in the improv of her mind by extend read . '' `` i am no long surpr at yo know on six accompl wom . i rath wond now at yo know any . '' `` ar you so sev upon yo own sex as to doubt the poss of al thi ? '' `` i nev saw such a wom . i nev saw such capac , and tast , and apply , and eleg , as you describ unit . '' mrs. hurst and miss bingley both cri out against the injust of her imply doubt , and wer both protest that they knew many wom who answ thi describ , when mr. hurst cal them to ord , with bit complaint of their inat to what was going forward . as al convers was thereby at an end , elizabe soon afterward left the room . `` elizabe bennet , '' said miss bingley , when the door was clos on her , `` is on of thos young lady who seek to recommend themselv to the oth sex by undervalu their own ; and with many men , i dar say , it success . but , in my opin , it is a paltry dev , a very mean art . '' `` undoubt , '' reply darcy , to whom thi remark was chief address , `` ther is a mean in al the art which lady sometim condescend to employ for capt . whatev bear affin to cun is desp . '' miss bingley was not so entir satisfy with thi reply as to continu the subject . elizabe join them again on to say that her sist was wors , and that she could not leav her . bingley urg mr. jon being sent for immedy ; whil his sist , convint that no country adv could be of any serv , recommend an express to town for on of the most emin phys . thi she would not hear of ; but she was not so unwil to comply with their broth 's propos ; and it was settl that mr. jon should be sent for ear in the morn , if miss bennet wer not decid bet . bingley was quit uncomfort ; his sist decl that they wer mis . they solac their wretch , howev , by duet aft sup , whil he could find no bet reliev to his feel than by giv his housekeep direct that every at might be paid to the sick lady and her sist . chapt 9 elizabe pass the chief of the night in her sist 's room , and in the morn had the pleas of being abl to send a tol answ to the inquiry which she very ear receiv from mr. bingley by a housemaid , and som tim afterward from the two eleg lady who wait on his sist . in spit of thi amend , howev , she request to hav a not sent to longbourn , desir her moth to visit jan , and form her own judg of her situ . the not was immedy dispatch , and it cont as quick comply with . mrs. bennet , accompany by her two youngest girl , reach netherfield soon aft the famy breakfast . had she found jan in any app dang , mrs. bennet would hav been very mis ; but being satisfy on see her that her il was not alarm , she had no wish of her recov immedy , as her rest to heal would prob remov her from netherfield . she would not list , theref , to her daught 's propos of being carry hom ; neith did the apothec , who ar about the sam tim , think it at al adv . aft sit a littl whil with jan , on miss bingley 's appear and invit , the moth and three daught al attend her into the breakfast parlo . bingley met them with hop that mrs. bennet had not found miss bennet wors than she expect . `` indee i hav , sir , '' was her answ . `` she is a gre deal too il to be mov . mr. jon say we must not think of mov her . we must trespass a littl long on yo kind . '' `` remov ! '' cri bingley . `` it must not be thought of . my sist , i am sur , wil not hear of her remov . '' `` you may depend upon it , madam , '' said miss bingley , with cold civil , `` that miss bennet wil receiv every poss at whil she remain with us . '' mrs. bennet was profus in her acknowledg . `` i am sur , '' she ad , `` if it was not for such good friend i do not know what would becom of her , for she is very il indee , and suff a vast deal , though with the greatest paty in the world , which is alway the way with her , for she has , without exceiv , the sweetest temp i hav ev met with . i oft tel my oth girl they ar noth to her . you hav a sweet room her , mr. bingley , and a charm prospect ov the gravel walk . i do not know a plac in the country that is eq to netherfield . you wil not think of quit it in a hurry , i hop , though you hav but a short leas . '' `` whatev i do is don in a hurry , '' reply he ; `` and theref if i should resolv to quit netherfield , i should prob be off in fiv minut . at pres , howev , i consid myself as quit fix her . '' `` that is exact what i should hav suppos of you , '' said elizabe . `` you begin to comprehend me , do you ? '' cri he , turn toward her . `` oh ! yes—i understand you perfect . '' `` i wish i might tak thi for a comply ; but to be so easy seen through i am afraid is pity . '' `` that is as it hap . it doe not follow that a deep , int charact is mor or less estim than such a on as yo . '' `` lizzy , '' cri her moth , `` rememb wher you ar , and do not run on in the wild man that you ar suff to do at hom . '' `` i did not know bef , '' continu bingley immedy , `` that you wer a study of charact . it must be an amus study . '' `` ye , but int charact ar the most amus . they hav at least that adv . '' `` the country , '' said darcy , `` can in gen supply but a few subject for such a study . in a country neighbo you mov in a very confin and unv socy . '' `` but peopl themselv alt so much , that ther is someth new to be observ in them for ev . '' `` ye , indee , '' cri mrs. bennet , offend by his man of ment a country neighbo . `` i ass you ther is quit as much of that going on in the country as in town . '' everybody was surpr , and darcy , aft look at her for a mom , turn sil away . mrs. bennet , who fant she had gain a complet vict ov him , continu her triumph . `` i can not see that london has any gre adv ov the country , for my part , exceiv the shop and publ plac . the country is a vast deal pleas , is it not , mr . bingley ? '' `` when i am in the country , '' he reply , `` i nev wish to leav it ; and when i am in town it is pretty much the sam . they hav each their adv , and i can be eq happy in eith . '' `` aye—that is becaus you hav the right disposit . but that gentlem , '' look at darcy , `` seem to think the country was noth at al . '' `` indee , mamm , you ar mistak , '' said elizabe , blush for her moth . `` you quit mistook mr. darcy . he on meant that ther was not such a vary of peopl to be met with in the country as in the town , which you must acknowledg to be tru . '' `` certain , my dear , nobody said ther wer ; but as to not meet with many peopl in thi neighbo , i believ ther ar few neighbo larg . i know we din with four-and-twenty famy . '' noth but concern for elizabe could en bingley to keep his count . his sist was less del , and direct her ey toward mr. darcy with a very express smil . elizabe , for the sak of say someth that might turn her moth 's thought , now ask her if charlot luca had been at longbourn sint her com away . `` ye , she cal yesterday with her fath . what an agr man sir william is , mr. bingley , is not he ? so much the man of fash ! so genteel and easy ! he has alway someth to say to everybody . that is my ide of good bree ; and thos person who fant themselv very import , and nev op their mouth , quit mistak the mat . '' `` did charlot din with you ? '' `` no , she would go hom . i fant she was want about the mince-pies . for my part , mr. bingley , i alway keep serv that can do their own work ; my daught ar brought up very diff . but everybody is to judg for themselv , and the lucas ar a very good sort of girl , i ass you . it is a pity they ar not handsom ! not that i think charlot so very plain—but then she is our particul friend . '' `` she seem a very pleas young wom . '' `` oh ! dear , ye ; but you must own she is very plain . lady luca herself has oft said so , and envy me jan 's beauty . i do not lik to boast of my own child , but to be sur , jane—on doe not oft see anybody bet look . it is what everybody say . i do not trust my own part . when she was on fifteen , ther was a man at my broth gardin 's in town so much in lov with her that my sister-in-law was sur he would mak her an off bef we cam away . but , howev , he did not . perhap he thought her too young . howev , he wrot som vers on her , and very pretty they wer . '' `` and so end his affect , '' said elizabe impaty . `` ther has been many a on , i fant , overcom in the sam way . i wond who first discov the eff of poetry in driv away lov ! '' `` i hav been us to consid poetry as the food of lov , '' said darcy . `` of a fin , stout , healthy lov it may . everyth nour what is strong already . but if it be on a slight , thin sort of inclin , i am convint that on good sonnet wil starv it entir away . '' darcy on smil ; and the gen paus which ensu mad elizabe trembl lest her moth should be expos herself again . she long to speak , but could think of noth to say ; and aft a short sil mrs. bennet beg rep her thank to mr. bingley for his kind to jan , with an apolog for troubl him also with lizzy . mr. bingley was unaffect civil in his answ , and forc his young sist to be civil also , and say what the occas requir . she perform her part indee without much gracy , but mrs. bennet was satisfy , and soon afterward ord her carry . upon thi sign , the youngest of her daught put herself forward . the two girl had been whisp to each oth dur the whol visit , and the result of it was , that the youngest should tax mr. bingley with hav prom on his first com into the country to giv a bal at netherfield . lyd was a stout , well-grown girl of fifteen , with a fin complect and good-humour count ; a favourit with her moth , whos affect had brought her into publ at an ear ag . she had high anim spirit , and a sort of nat self-consequence , which the at of the off , to whom her unc 's good din , and her own easy man recommend her , had increas into ass . she was very eq , theref , to address mr. bingley on the subject of the bal , and abrupt remind him of his prom ; ad , that it would be the most sham thing in the world if he did not keep it . his answ to thi sud attack was delight to their moth 's ear : '' i am perfect ready , i ass you , to keep my eng ; and when yo sist is recov , you shal , if you pleas , nam the very day of the bal . but you would not wish to be dant when she is ill. '' lyd decl herself satisfy . `` oh ! yes—it would be much bet to wait til jan was wel , and by that tim most lik captain cart would be at meryton again . and when you hav giv yo bal , '' she ad , `` i shal insist on their giv on also . i shal tel colonel forst it wil be quit a sham if he doe not . '' mrs. bennet and her daught then depart , and elizabe return inst to jan , leav her own and her rel ' behavio to the remark of the two lady and mr. darcy ; the lat of whom , howev , could not be prevail on to join in their cens of her , in spit of al miss bingley 's wit on fin ey . chapt 10 the day pass much as the day bef had don . mrs. hurst and miss bingley had spent som hour of the morn with the invalid , who continu , though slow , to mend ; and in the ev elizabe join their party in the drawing-room . the loo-table , howev , did not appear . mr. darcy was writ , and miss bingley , seat near him , was watch the progress of his let and rep cal off his at by mess to his sist . mr. hurst and mr. bingley wer at piquet , and mrs. hurst was observ their gam . elizabe took up som needlework , and was sufficy amus in attend to what pass between darcy and his comp . the perpet commend of the lady , eith on his handwrit , or on the ev of his lin , or on the leng of his let , with the perfect unconcern with which her pra wer receiv , form a cury dialog , and was exact in un with her opin of each . `` how delight miss darcy wil be to receiv such a let ! '' he mad no answ . `` you writ uncommon fast . '' `` you ar mistak . i writ rath slow . '' `` how many let you must hav occas to writ in the cours of a year ! let of busy , too ! how ody i should think them ! '' `` it is fortun , then , that they fal to my lot instead of yo . '' `` pray tel yo sist that i long to see her . '' `` i hav already told her so ont , by yo desir . '' `` i am afraid you do not lik yo pen . let me mend it for you . i mend pen remark wel . '' `` thank you—but i alway mend my own . '' `` how can you cont to writ so ev ? '' he was sil . `` tel yo sist i am delight to hear of her improv on the harp ; and pray let her know that i am quit in rapt with her beauty littl design for a tabl , and i think it infinit supery to miss grantley 's . '' `` wil you giv me leav to def yo rapt til i writ again ? at pres i hav not room to do them just . '' `` oh ! it is of no consequ . i shal see her in janu . but do you alway writ such charm long let to her , mr . darcy ? '' `` they ar gen long ; but wheth alway charm it is not for me to determin . '' `` it is a rul with me , that a person who can writ a long let with eas , can not writ ill. '' '' that wil not do for a comply to darcy , carolin , '' cri her broth , `` becaus he doe not writ with eas . he study too much for word of four syl . do not you , darcy ? '' `` my styl of writ is very diff from yo . '' `` oh ! '' cri miss bingley , `` charl writ in the most careless way imagin . he leav out half his word , and blot the rest . '' `` my idea flow so rapid that i hav not tim to express them—by which mean my let sometim convey no idea at al to my correspond . '' `` yo humil , mr. bingley , '' said elizabe , `` must disarm reproof . '' `` noth is mor deceit , '' said darcy , `` than the appear of humil . it is oft on careless of opin , and sometim an indirect boast . '' `` and which of the two do you cal my littl rec piec of modesty ? '' `` the indirect boast ; for you ar real proud of yo defect in writ , becaus you consid them as process from a rapid of thought and careless of execut , which , if not estim , you think at least high interest . the pow of doing anyth with quick is alway priz much by the possess , and oft without any at to the imperfect of the perform . when you told mrs. bennet thi morn that if you ev resolv upon quit netherfield you should be gon in fiv minut , you meant it to be a sort of panegyr , of comply to yourself—and yet what is ther so very laud in a precipit which must leav very necess busy undon , and can be of no real adv to yourself or anyon els ? '' `` nay , '' cri bingley , `` thi is too much , to rememb at night al the fool thing that wer said in the morn . and yet , upon my hono , i believ what i said of myself to be tru , and i believ it at thi mom . at least , theref , i did not assum the charact of needless precipit mer to show off bef the lady . '' `` i dar say you believ it ; but i am by no mean convint that you would be gon with such cel . yo conduc would be quit as depend on chant as that of any man i know ; and if , as you wer mount yo hors , a friend wer to say , 'bingley , you had bet stay til next week , ' you would prob do it , you would prob not go—and at anoth word , might stay a mon . '' `` you hav on prov by thi , '' cri elizabe , `` that mr. bingley did not do just to his own disposit . you hav shown him off now much mor than he did himself . '' `` i am excess grat , '' said bingley , `` by yo convert what my friend say into a comply on the sweet of my temp . but i am afraid you ar giv it a turn which that gentlem did by no mean intend ; for he would certain think bet of me , if und such a circumst i wer to giv a flat den , and rid off as fast as i could . '' `` would mr. darcy then consid the rash of yo origin int as aton for by yo obstin in adh to it ? '' `` upon my word , i can not exact explain the mat ; darcy must speak for himself . '' `` you expect me to account for opin which you choos to cal min , but which i hav nev acknowledg . allow the cas , howev , to stand accord to yo repres , you must rememb , miss bennet , that the friend who is suppos to desir his return to the hous , and the delay of his plan , has mer desir it , ask it without off on argu in favo of it propry . '' `` to yield readily—easily—to the persuas of a friend is no merit with you . '' `` to yield without convict is no comply to the understand of eith . '' `` you appear to me , mr. darcy , to allow noth for the influ of friend and affect . a regard for the request would oft mak on ready yield to a request , without wait for argu to reason on into it . i am not particul speak of such a cas as you hav suppos about mr. bingley . we may as wel wait , perhap , til the circumst occ bef we discuss the discret of his behavio thereupon . but in gen and ordin cas between friend and friend , wher on of them is desir by the oth to chang a resolv of no very gre mom , should you think il of that person for comply with the desir , without wait to be argu into it ? '' `` wil it not be adv , bef we process on thi subject , to arrang with rath mor precid the degr of import which is to appertain to thi request , as wel as the degr of intim subsist between the party ? '' `` by al mean , '' cri bingley ; `` let us hear al the particul , not forget their comp height and siz ; for that wil hav mor weight in the argu , miss bennet , than you may be aw of . i ass you , that if darcy wer not such a gre tal fellow , in comparison with myself , i should not pay him half so much def . i decl i do not know a mor aw object than darcy , on particul occas , and in particul plac ; at his own hous espec , and of a sunday ev , when he has noth to do . '' mr. darcy smil ; but elizabe thought she could perceiv that he was rath offend , and theref check her laugh . miss bingley warm res the indign he had receiv , in an expost with her broth for talk such nonsens . `` i see yo design , bingley , '' said his friend . `` you dislik an argu , and want to sil thi . '' `` perhap i do . argu ar too much lik disput . if you and miss bennet wil def yo til i am out of the room , i shal be very thank ; and then you may say whatev you lik of me . '' `` what you ask , '' said elizabe , `` is no sacr on my sid ; and mr. darcy had much bet fin his let . '' mr. darcy took her adv , and did fin his let . when that busy was ov , he apply to miss bingley and elizabe for an indulg of som mus . miss bingley mov with som alacr to the pianofort ; and , aft a polit request that elizabe would lead the way which the oth as polit and mor earnest neg , she seat herself . mrs. hurst sang with her sist , and whil they wer thu employ , elizabe could not help observ , as she turn ov som music-books that lay on the instru , how frequ mr. darcy 's ey wer fix on her . she hard knew how to suppos that she could be an object of admir to so gre a man ; and yet that he should look at her becaus he dislik her , was stil mor strange . she could on imagin , howev , at last that she drew his not becaus ther was someth mor wrong and reprehens , accord to his idea of right , than in any oth person pres . the supposit did not pain her . she lik him too littl to car for his approb . aft play som it song , miss bingley vary the charm by a liv scotch air ; and soon afterward mr. darcy , draw near elizabe , said to her : '' do not you feel a gre inclin , miss bennet , to seiz such an opportun of dant a reel ? '' she smil , but mad no answ . he rep the quest , with som surpr at her sil . `` oh ! '' said she , `` i heard you bef , but i could not immedy determin what to say in reply . you want me , i know , to say 'yes , ' that you might hav the pleas of desp my tast ; but i alway delight in overthrow thos kind of schemes , and che a person of their premedit contempt . i hav , theref , mad up my mind to tel you , that i do not want to dant a reel at all—and now desp me if you dar . '' `` indee i do not dar . '' elizabe , hav rath expect to affront him , was amaz at his gallantry ; but ther was a mixt of sweet and arch in her man which mad it difficult for her to affront anybody ; and darcy had nev been so bewitch by any wom as he was by her . he real believ , that wer it not for the infery of her connect , he should be in som dang . miss bingley saw , or suspect enough to be jeal ; and her gre anxy for the recovery of her dear friend jan receiv som assist from her desir of get rid of elizabe . she oft tri to provok darcy into dislik her guest , by talk of their suppos marry , and plan his happy in such an al . `` i hop , '' said she , as they wer walk togeth in the shrubbery the next day , `` you wil giv yo mother-in-law a few hint , when thi desir ev tak plac , as to the adv of hold her tongu ; and if you can compass it , do cur the young girl of run aft off . and , if i may ment so del a subject , endeavo to check that littl someth , bord on conceit and impertin , which yo lady possess . '' `` hav you anyth els to propos for my domest fel ? '' `` oh ! ye . do let the portrait of yo unc and aunt phillip be plac in the gallery at pemberley . put them next to yo great-uncle the judg . they ar in the sam profess , you know , on in diff lin . as for yo elizabe 's pict , you must not hav it tak , for what paint could do just to thos beauty ey ? '' `` it would not be easy , indee , to catch their express , but their colo and shap , and the eyelash , so remark fin , might be cop . '' at that mom they wer met from anoth walk by mrs. hurst and elizabe herself . `` i did not know that you intend to walk , '' said miss bingley , in som confus , lest they had been overheard . `` you us us abomin il , '' answ mrs. hurst , `` run away without tel us that you wer com out . '' then tak the diseng arm of mr. darcy , she left elizabe to walk by herself . the path just admit three . mr. darcy felt their rud , and immedy said : '' thi walk is not wid enough for our party . we had bet go into the avenu . '' but elizabe , who had not the least inclin to remain with them , laugh answ : '' no , no ; stay wher you ar . you ar charm group , and appear to uncommon adv . the picturesqu would be spoilt by admit a four . good-bye . '' she then ran gai off , rejo as she rambl about , in the hop of being at hom again in a day or two . jan was already so much recov as to intend leav her room for a coupl of hour that ev . chapt 11 when the lady remov aft din , elizabe ran up to her sist , and see her wel guard from cold , attend her into the drawing-room , wher she was welcom by her two friend with many profess of pleas ; and elizabe had nev seen them so agr as they wer dur the hour which pass bef the gentlem appear . their pow of convers wer consid . they could describ an entertain with acc , rel an anecdot with humo , and laugh at their acquaint with spirit . but when the gentlem ent , jan was no long the first object ; miss bingley 's ey wer inst turn toward darcy , and she had someth to say to him bef he had adv many step . he address himself to miss bennet , with a polit congrat ; mr. hurst also mad her a slight bow , and said he was `` very glad ; '' but diffus and warm remain for bingley 's salut . he was ful of joy and at . the first half-hour was spent in pil up the fir , lest she should suff from the chang of room ; and she remov at his desir to the oth sid of the fireplac , that she might be furth from the door . he then sat down by her , and talk scarc to anyon els . elizabe , at work in the opposit corn , saw it al with gre delight . when tea was ov , mr. hurst remind his sister-in-law of the card-table—but in vain . she had obtain priv intellig that mr. darcy did not wish for card ; and mr. hurst soon found ev his op petit reject . she ass him that no on intend to play , and the sil of the whol party on the subject seem to just her . mr. hurst had theref noth to do , but to stretch himself on on of the sofa and go to sleep . darcy took up a book ; miss bingley did the sam ; and mrs. hurst , princip occupy in play with her bracelet and ring , join now and then in her broth 's convers with miss bennet . miss bingley 's at was quit as much eng in watch mr. darcy 's progress through his book , as in read her own ; and she was perpet eith mak som inquiry , or look at his pag . she could not win him , howev , to any convers ; he mer answ her quest , and read on . at leng , quit exhaust by the attempt to be amus with her own book , which she had on chos becaus it was the second volum of his , she gav a gre yawn and said , `` how pleas it is to spend an ev in thi way ! i decl aft al ther is no enjoy lik read ! how much soon on tir of anyth than of a book ! when i hav a hous of my own , i shal be mis if i hav not an excel libr . '' no on mad any reply . she then yawn again , threw asid her book , and cast her ey round the room in quest for som amus ; when hear her broth ment a bal to miss bennet , she turn sud toward him and said : '' by the bye , charl , ar you real sery in medit a dant at netherfield ? i would adv you , bef you determin on it , to consult the wish of the pres party ; i am much mistak if ther ar not som among us to whom a bal would be rath a pun than a pleas . '' `` if you mean darcy , '' cri her broth , `` he may go to bed , if he choos , bef it begins—but as for the bal , it is quit a settl thing ; and as soon as nichol has mad whit soup enough , i shal send round my card . '' `` i should lik bal infinit bet , '' she reply , `` if they wer carry on in a diff man ; but ther is someth insuff tedy in the us process of such a meet . it would sur be much mor rat if convers instead of dant wer mad the ord of the day . '' `` much mor rat , my dear carolin , i dar say , but it would not be near so much lik a bal . '' miss bingley mad no answ , and soon afterward she got up and walk about the room . her fig was eleg , and she walk wel ; but darcy , at whom it was al aim , was stil inflex study . in the desp of her feel , she resolv on on effort mor , and , turn to elizabe , said : '' miss eliz bennet , let me persuad you to follow my exampl , and tak a turn about the room . i ass you it is very refresh aft sit so long in on attitud . '' elizabe was surpr , but agree to it immedy . miss bingley success no less in the real object of her civil ; mr. darcy look up . he was as much awak to the novel of at in that quart as elizabe herself could be , and unconscy clos his book . he was direct invit to join their party , but he declin it , observ that he could imagin but two mot for their choos to walk up and down the room togeth , with eith of which mot his join them would interf . `` what could he mean ? she was dying to know what could be his mean ? `` —and ask elizabe wheth she could at al understand him ? `` not at al , '' was her answ ; `` but depend upon it , he mean to be sev on us , and our surest way of disappoint him wil be to ask noth about it . '' miss bingley , howev , was incap of disappoint mr. darcy in anyth , and persev theref in requir an expl of his two mot . `` i hav not the smallest object to explain them , '' said he , as soon as she allow him to speak . `` you eith choos thi method of pass the ev becaus you ar in each oth 's confid , and hav secret affair to discuss , or becaus you ar conscy that yo fig appear to the greatest adv in walk ; if the first , i would be complet in yo way , and if the second , i can admir you much bet as i sit by the fir . '' `` oh ! shock ! '' cri miss bingley . `` i nev heard anyth so abomin . how shal we pun him for such a speech ? '' `` noth so easy , if you hav but the inclin , '' said elizabe . `` we can al plagu and pun on anoth . teas him—laugh at him . intim as you ar , you must know how it is to be don . '' `` but upon my hono , i do not . i do ass you that my intim has not yet taught me that . teas calm of man and pres of mind ! no , no ; i feel he may defy us ther . and as to laught , we wil not expos ourselv , if you pleas , by attempt to laugh without a subject . mr. darcy may hug himself . '' `` mr. darcy is not to be laugh at ! '' cri elizabe . `` that is an uncommon adv , and uncommon i hop it wil continu , for it would be a gre loss to me to hav many such acquaint . i dear lov a laugh . '' `` miss bingley , '' said he , `` has giv me mor credit than can be . the wisest and the best of men—nay , the wisest and best of their actions—may be rend ridic by a person whos first object in lif is a jok . '' `` certain , '' reply elizabeth— '' ther ar such peopl , but i hop i am not on of them . i hop i nev ridic what is wis and good . fol and nonsens , whim and inconsist , do divert me , i own , and i laugh at them whenev i can . but thes , i suppos , ar prec what you ar without . '' `` perhap that is not poss for anyon . but it has been the study of my lif to avoid thos weak which oft expos a strong understand to ridic . '' `` such as van and prid . '' `` ye , van is a weak indee . but pride—wher ther is a real supery of mind , prid wil be alway und good reg . '' elizabe turn away to hid a smil . `` yo examin of mr. darcy is ov , i presum , '' said miss bingley ; `` and pray what is the result ? '' `` i am perfect convint by it that mr. darcy has no defect . he own it himself without disgu . '' `` no , '' said darcy , `` i hav mad no such pretend . i hav fault enough , but they ar not , i hop , of understand . my temp i dar not vouch for . it is , i believ , too littl yielding—certainly too littl for the conveny of the world . i can not forget the fol and vic of oth so soon as i ought , nor their offens against myself . my feel ar not puff about with every attempt to mov them . my temp would perhap be cal res . my good opin ont lost , is lost forev . '' `` that is a fail indee ! '' cri elizabe . `` implac res is a shad in a charact . but you hav chos yo fault wel . i real can not laugh at it . you ar saf from me . '' `` ther is , i believ , in every disposit a tend to som particul evil—a nat defect , which not ev the best educ can overcom . '' `` and yo defect is to hat everybody . '' `` and yo , '' he reply with a smil , `` is wil to misunderstand them . '' `` do let us hav a littl mus , '' cri miss bingley , tir of a convers in which she had no shar . `` louis , you wil not mind my wak mr . hurst ? '' her sist had not the smallest object , and the pianofort was op ; and darcy , aft a few mom ' recollect , was not sorry for it . he beg to feel the dang of pay elizabe too much at . chapt 12 in consequ of an agr between the sist , elizabe wrot the next morn to their moth , to beg that the carry might be sent for them in the cours of the day . but mrs. bennet , who had calc on her daught remain at netherfield til the follow tuesday , which would exact fin jan 's week , could not bring herself to receiv them with pleas bef . her answ , theref , was not prop , at least not to elizabe 's wish , for she was impaty to get hom . mrs. bennet sent them word that they could not poss hav the carry bef tuesday ; and in her postscrib it was ad , that if mr. bingley and his sist press them to stay long , she could spar them very wel . against stay long , howev , elizabe was posit resolved—nor did she much expect it would be ask ; and fear , on the cont , as being consid as intrud themselv needless long , she urg jan to borrow mr. bingley 's carry immedy , and at leng it was settl that their origin design of leav netherfield that morn should be ment , and the request mad . the commun excit many profess of concern ; and enough was said of wish them to stay at least til the follow day to work on jan ; and til the morrow their going was defer . miss bingley was then sorry that she had propos the delay , for her jealousy and dislik of on sist much excess her affect for the oth . the mast of the hous heard with real sorrow that they wer to go so soon , and rep tri to persuad miss bennet that it would not be saf for her—that she was not enough recov ; but jan was firm wher she felt herself to be right . to mr. darcy it was welcom intelligence—elizabeth had been at netherfield long enough . she attract him mor than he liked—and miss bingley was uncivil to her , and mor teas than us to himself . he wis resolv to be particul car that no sign of admir should now escap him , noth that could elev her with the hop of influ his fel ; sens that if such an ide had been suggest , his behavio dur the last day must hav mat weight in confirm or crush it . steady to his purpos , he scarc spok ten word to her through the whol of saturday , and though they wer at on tim left by themselv for half-an-hour , he adh most conscienty to his book , and would not ev look at her . on sunday , aft morn serv , the sep , so agr to almost al , took plac . miss bingley 's civil to elizabe increas at last very rapid , as wel as her affect for jan ; and when they part , aft ass the lat of the pleas it would alway giv her to see her eith at longbourn or netherfield , and embrac her most tend , she ev shook hand with the form . elizabe took leav of the whol party in the liveliest of spirit . they wer not welcom hom very cord by their moth . mrs. bennet wond at their com , and thought them very wrong to giv so much troubl , and was sur jan would hav caught cold again . but their fath , though very lacon in his express of pleas , was real glad to see them ; he had felt their import in the famy circ . the ev convers , when they wer al assembl , had lost much of it anim , and almost al it sens by the abs of jan and elizabe . they found mary , as us , deep in the study of thorough-bass and hum nat ; and had som extract to admir , and som new observ of threadbare mor to list to . catherin and lyd had inform for them of a diff sort . much had been don and much had been said in the regy sint the prec wednesday ; sev of the off had din lat with their unc , a priv had been flog , and it had act been hint that colonel forst was going to be marry . chapt 13 '' i hop , my dear , '' said mr. bennet to his wif , as they wer at breakfast the next morn , `` that you hav ord a good din to-day , becaus i hav reason to expect an addit to our famy party . '' `` who do you mean , my dear ? i know of nobody that is com , i am sur , unless charlot luca should hap to cal in—and i hop my din ar good enough for her . i do not believ she oft see such at hom . '' `` the person of whom i speak is a gentlem , and a stranger . '' mrs. bennet 's ey sparkl . `` a gentlem and a stranger ! it is mr. bingley , i am sur ! wel , i am sur i shal be extrem glad to see mr. bingley . but—good lord ! how unlucky ! ther is not a bit of fish to be got to-day . lyd , my lov , ring the bell—i must speak to hil thi mom . '' `` it is not mr. bingley , '' said her husband ; `` it is a person whom i nev saw in the whol cours of my lif . '' thi rous a gen aston ; and he had the pleas of being eag quest by his wif and his fiv daught at ont . aft amus himself som tim with their curios , he thu explain : '' about a mon ago i receiv thi let ; and about a fortnight ago i answ it , for i thought it a cas of som del , and requir ear at . it is from my cousin , mr. collin , who , when i am dead , may turn you al out of thi hous as soon as he pleas . '' `` oh ! my dear , '' cri his wif , `` i can not bear to hear that ment . pray do not talk of that ody man . i do think it is the hardest thing in the world , that yo est should be entail away from yo own childr ; and i am sur , if i had been you , i should hav tri long ago to do someth or oth about it . '' jan and elizabe tri to explain to her the nat of an entail . they had oft attempt to do it bef , but it was a subject on which mrs. bennet was beyond the reach of reason , and she continu to rail bit against the cruel of settl an est away from a famy of fiv daught , in favo of a man whom nobody car anyth about . `` it certain is a most iniquit affair , '' said mr. bennet , `` and noth can clear mr. collin from the guilt of inherit longbourn . but if you wil list to his let , you may perhap be a littl soft by his man of express himself . '' `` no , that i am sur i shal not ; and i think it is very impertin of him to writ to you at al , and very hypocrit . i hat such fals friend . why could he not keep on quarrel with you , as his fath did bef him ? '' `` why , indee ; he doe seem to hav had som fil scruples on that head , as you wil hear . '' `` hunsford , near westerham , kent , 15th octob . `` dear sir , — '' the disagr subsist between yourself and my lat hono fath alway gav me much uneasy , and sint i hav had the misfortun to los him , i hav frequ wish to heal the breach ; but for som tim i was kept back by my own doubt , fear lest it might seem disrespect to his mem for me to be on good term with anyon with whom it had alway pleas him to be at variance.—'ther , mrs . bennet . '—my mind , howev , is now mad up on the subject , for hav receiv ordin at east , i hav been so fortun as to be distinct by the patron of the right hono lady catherin de bourgh , widow of sir lew de bourgh , whos bounty and benef has prefer me to the valu rect of thi par , wher it shal be my earnest endeavo to dem myself with grat respect toward her lady , and be ev ready to perform thos rit and ceremony which ar institut by the church of england . as a clergym , moreov , i feel it my duty to promot and est the bless of peac in al famy within the reach of my influ ; and on thes ground i flat myself that my pres overt ar high commend , and that the circumst of my being next in the entail of longbourn est wil be kind overlook on yo sid , and not lead you to reject the off olive-branch . i can not be otherw than concern at being the mean of ind yo amy daught , and beg leav to apolog for it , as wel as to ass you of my ready to mak them every poss amends—but of thi hereaft . if you should hav no object to receiv me into yo hous , i propos myself the satisfact of wait on you and yo famy , monday , novemb 18th , by four o'clock , and shal prob trespass on yo hospit til the saturday se'ennight follow , which i can do without any inconveny , as lady catherin is far from object to my occas abs on a sunday , provid that som oth clergym is eng to do the duty of the day.—i remain , dear sir , with respect comply to yo lady and daught , yo well-wisher and friend , '' william collin '' '' at four o'clock , theref , we may expect thi peace-making gentlem , '' said mr. bennet , as he fold up the let . `` he seem to be a most conscienty and polit young man , upon my word , and i doubt not wil prov a valu acquaint , espec if lady catherin should be so indulg as to let him com to us again . '' `` ther is som sens in what he say about the girl , howev , and if he is dispos to mak them any amend , i shal not be the person to disco him . '' `` though it is difficult , '' said jan , `` to guess in what way he can mean to mak us the aton he think our due , the wish is certain to his credit . '' elizabe was chief struck by his extraordin def for lady catherin , and his kind int of christening , marry , and bury his par whenev it wer requir . `` he must be an od , i think , '' said she . `` i can not mak him out.—there is someth very pomp in his style.—and what can he mean by apolog for being next in the entail ? —we can not suppos he would help it if he could.—could he be a sens man , sir ? '' `` no , my dear , i think not . i hav gre hop of find him quit the revers . ther is a mixt of servil and self-importance in his let , which prom wel . i am impaty to see him . '' `` in point of composit , '' said mary , `` the let doe not seem defect . the ide of the olive-branch perhap is not whol new , yet i think it is wel express . '' to catherin and lyd , neith the let nor it writ wer in any degr interest . it was next to imposs that their cousin should com in a scarlet coat , and it was now som week sint they had receiv pleas from the socy of a man in any oth colo . as for their moth , mr. collin 's let had don away much of her ill-wil , and she was prep to see him with a degr of compos which aston her husband and daught . mr. collin was punct to his tim , and was receiv with gre polit by the whol famy . mr. bennet indee said littl ; but the lady wer ready enough to talk , and mr. collin seem neith in nee of enco , nor inclin to be sil himself . he was a tal , heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty . his air was grav and stat , and his man wer very form . he had not been long seat bef he comply mrs. bennet on hav so fin a famy of daught ; said he had heard much of their beauty , but that in thi inst fam had fal short of the tru ; and ad , that he did not doubt her see them al in due tim dispos of in marry . thi gallantry was not much to the tast of som of his hear ; but mrs. bennet , who quarrel with no comply , answ most ready . `` you ar very kind , i am sur ; and i wish with al my heart it may prov so , for els they wil be destitut enough . thing ar settl so od . '' `` you allud , perhap , to the entail of thi est . '' `` ah ! sir , i do indee . it is a griev affair to my poor girl , you must confess . not that i mean to find fault with you , for such thing i know ar al chant in thi world . ther is no know how est wil go when ont they com to be entail . '' `` i am very sens , madam , of the hard to my fair cousin , and could say much on the subject , but that i am cauty of appear forward and precipit . but i can ass the young lady that i com prep to admir them . at pres i wil not say mor ; but , perhap , when we ar bet acquainted— '' he was interrupt by a summon to din ; and the girl smil on each oth . they wer not the on object of mr. collin 's admir . the hal , the dining-room , and al it furnit , wer examin and pra ; and his commend of everyth would hav touch mrs. bennet 's heart , but for the mort supposit of his view it al as his own fut property . the din too in it turn was high admir ; and he beg to know to which of his fair cousin the excel of it cook was ow . but he was set right ther by mrs. bennet , who ass him with som asp that they wer very wel abl to keep a good cook , and that her daught had noth to do in the kitch . he beg pardon for hav displeas her . in a soft ton she decl herself not at al offend ; but he continu to apolog for about a quart of an hour . chapt 14 dur din , mr. bennet scarc spok at al ; but when the serv wer withdrawn , he thought it tim to hav som convers with his guest , and theref start a subject in which he expect him to shin , by observ that he seem very fortun in his patro . lady catherin de bourgh 's at to his wish , and consid for his comfort , appear very remark . mr. bennet could not hav chos bet . mr. collin was eloqu in her pra . the subject elev him to mor than us solemn of man , and with a most import aspect he protest that `` he had nev in his lif wit such behavio in a person of rank—such aff and condescend , as he had himself expery from lady catherin . she had been gracy pleas to approv of both of the discours which he had already had the hono of preach bef her . she had also ask him twic to din at ros , and had sent for him on the saturday bef , to mak up her pool of quadril in the ev . lady catherin was reckon proud by many peopl he knew , but he had nev seen anyth but aff in her . she had alway spok to him as she would to any oth gentlem ; she mad not the smallest object to his join in the socy of the neighbo nor to his leav the par occas for a week or two , to visit his rel . she had ev condescend to adv him to marry as soon as he could , provid he chos with discret ; and had ont paid him a visit in his humbl parson , wher she had perfect approv al the alt he had been mak , and had ev vouchsaf to suggest som herself—some shelv in the closet up stair . '' `` that is al very prop and civil , i am sur , '' said mrs. bennet , `` and i dar say she is a very agr wom . it is a pity that gre lady in gen ar not mor lik her . doe she liv near you , sir ? '' `` the gard in which stand my humbl abod is sep on by a lan from ros park , her lady 's resid . '' `` i think you said she was a widow , sir ? has she any famy ? '' `` she has on on daught , the heiress of ros , and of very extend property . '' `` ah ! '' said mrs. bennet , shak her head , `` then she is bet off than many girl . and what sort of young lady is she ? is she handsom ? '' `` she is a most charm young lady indee . lady catherin herself say that , in point of tru beauty , miss de bourgh is far supery to the handsomest of her sex , becaus ther is that in her feat which mark the young lady of distinct bir . she is unfortun of a sick constitut , which has prev her from mak that progress in many accompl which she could not hav otherw fail of , as i am inform by the lady who superintend her educ , and who stil resid with them . but she is perfect amy , and oft condescend to driv by my humbl abod in her littl phaeton and pony . '' `` has she been pres ? i do not rememb her nam among the lady at court . '' `` her indiff stat of heal unhappy prev her being in town ; and by that mean , as i told lady catherin on day , has depr the brit court of it brightest orna . her lady seem pleas with the ide ; and you may imagin that i am happy on every occas to off thos littl del comply which ar alway acceiv to lady . i hav mor than ont observ to lady catherin , that her charm daught seem born to be a duchess , and that the most elev rank , instead of giv her consequ , would be adorn by her . thes ar the kind of littl thing which pleas her lady , and it is a sort of at which i conceiv myself peculi bound to pay . '' `` you judg very prop , '' said mr. bennet , `` and it is happy for you that you possess the tal of flat with del . may i ask wheth thes pleas at process from the impuls of the mom , or ar the result of prevy study ? '' `` they ar chief from what is pass at the tim , and though i sometim amus myself with suggest and arrang such littl eleg comply as may be adapt to ordin occas , i alway wish to giv them as unstudy an air as poss . '' mr. bennet 's expect wer ful answ . his cousin was as absurd as he had hop , and he list to him with the keenest enjoy , maintain at the sam tim the most resolv compos of count , and , exceiv in an occas glant at elizabe , requir no partn in his pleas . by tea-time , howev , the dos had been enough , and mr. bennet was glad to tak his guest into the drawing-room again , and , when tea was ov , glad to invit him to read aloud to the lady . mr. collin ready ass , and a book was produc ; but , on behold it ( for everyth annount it to be from a circ libr ) , he start back , and beg pardon , protest that he nev read novel . kitty star at him , and lyd exclaim . oth book wer produc , and aft som delib he chos fordyc 's sermon . lyd gap as he op the volum , and bef he had , with very monoton solemn , read three pag , she interrupt him with : '' do you know , mamm , that my unc phillip talk of turn away richard ; and if he doe , colonel forst wil hir him . my aunt told me so herself on saturday . i shal walk to meryton to-morrow to hear mor about it , and to ask when mr. denny com back from town . '' lyd was bid by her two eldest sist to hold her tongu ; but mr. collin , much offend , laid asid his book , and said : '' i hav oft observ how littl young lady ar interest by book of a sery stamp , though writ sol for their benefit . it amaz me , i confess ; for , certain , ther can be noth so adv to them as instruct . but i wil no long importun my young cousin . '' then turn to mr. bennet , he off himself as his antagon at backgammon . mr. bennet acceiv the challeng , observ that he act very wis in leav the girl to their own trifl amus . mrs. bennet and her daught apolog most civil for lyd 's interrupt , and prom that it should not occ again , if he would resum his book ; but mr. collin , aft ass them that he bor his young cousin no ill-wil , and should nev res her behavio as any affront , seat himself at anoth tabl with mr. bennet , and prep for backgammon . chapt 15 mr. collin was not a sens man , and the deficy of nat had been but littl assist by educ or socy ; the greatest part of his lif hav been spent und the guid of an illit and mis fath ; and though he belong to on of the univers , he had mer kept the necess term , without form at it any us acquaint . the subject in which his fath had brought him up had giv him origin gre humil of man ; but it was now a good deal counteract by the self-conceit of a weak head , liv in retir , and the consequ feel of ear and unexpect prosp . a fortun chant had recommend him to lady catherin de bourgh when the liv of hunsford was vac ; and the respect which he felt for her high rank , and his ven for her as his patro , mingl with a very good opin of himself , of his auth as a clergym , and his right as a rect , mad him altogeth a mixt of prid and obsequy , self-importance and humil . hav now a good hous and a very sufficy incom , he intend to marry ; and in seek a recont with the longbourn famy he had a wif in view , as he meant to choos on of the daught , if he found them as handsom and amy as they wer repres by common report . thi was his plan of amends—of atonement—for inherit their fath 's est ; and he thought it an excel on , ful of elig and suit , and excess gen and disinterest on his own part . his plan did not vary on see them . miss bennet 's lov fac confirm his view , and est al his strictest not of what was due to seny ; and for the first ev she was his settl cho . the next morn , howev , mad an alt ; for in a quart of an hour 's tete-a-tet with mrs. bennet bef breakfast , a convers begin with his parsonage-hous , and lead nat to the avow of his hop , that a mistress might be found for it at longbourn , produc from her , amid very compla smil and gen enco , a caut against the very jan he had fix on . `` as to her young daught , she could not tak upon her to say—she could not posit answer—but she did not know of any prepossess ; her eldest daught , she must just mention—she felt it incumb on her to hint , was lik to be very soon eng . '' mr. collin had on to chang from jan to elizabeth—and it was soon done—don whil mrs. bennet was stir the fir . elizabe , eq next to jan in bir and beauty , success her of cours . mrs. bennet treas up the hint , and trust that she might soon hav two daught marry ; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day bef was now high in her good grac . lyd 's int of walk to meryton was not forgot ; every sist exceiv mary agree to go with her ; and mr. collin was to attend them , at the request of mr. bennet , who was most anxy to get rid of him , and hav his libr to himself ; for thith mr. collin had follow him aft breakfast ; and ther he would continu , nomin eng with on of the largest folio in the collect , but real talk to mr. bennet , with littl cess , of his hous and gard at hunsford . such doing discompos mr. bennet excess . in his libr he had been alway sur of leis and tranquil ; and though prep , as he told elizabe , to meet with fol and conceit in every oth room of the hous , he was us to be fre from them ther ; his civil , theref , was most prompt in invit mr. collin to join his daught in their walk ; and mr. collin , being in fact much bet fit for a walk than a read , was extrem pleas to clos his larg book , and go . in pomp noth on his sid , and civil ass on that of his cousin , their tim pass til they ent meryton . the at of the young on was then no long to be gain by him . their ey wer immedy wand up in the street in quest of the off , and noth less than a very smart bonnet indee , or a real new muslin in a shop window , could recal them . but the at of every lady was soon caught by a young man , whom they had nev seen bef , of most gentlemanlik appear , walk with anoth off on the oth sid of the way . the off was the very mr. denny concern whos return from london lyd cam to inquir , and he bow as they pass . al wer struck with the stranger 's air , al wond who he could be ; and kitty and lyd , determin if poss to find out , led the way across the street , und pretens of want someth in an opposit shop , and fortun had just gain the pav when the two gentlem , turn back , had reach the sam spot . mr. denny address them direct , and ent permit to introduc his friend , mr. wickham , who had return with him the day bef from town , and he was happy to say had acceiv a commit in their corp . thi was exact as it should be ; for the young man want on regy to mak him complet charm . his appear was gre in his favo ; he had al the best part of beauty , a fin count , a good fig , and very pleas address . the introduc was follow up on his sid by a happy ready of conversation—a ready at the sam tim perfect correct and unassum ; and the whol party wer stil stand and talk togeth very agr , when the sound of hors drew their not , and darcy and bingley wer seen rid down the street . on distinct the lady of the group , the two gentlem cam direct toward them , and beg the us civil . bingley was the princip spokesm , and miss bennet the princip object . he was then , he said , on his way to longbourn on purpos to inquir aft her . mr. darcy corrob it with a bow , and was begin to determin not to fix his ey on elizabe , when they wer sud arrest by the sight of the stranger , and elizabe hap to see the count of both as they look at each oth , was al aston at the effect of the meet . both chang colo , on look whit , the oth red . mr. wickham , aft a few mom , touch his hat—a salut which mr. darcy just deign to return . what could be the mean of it ? it was imposs to imagin ; it was imposs not to long to know . in anoth minut , mr. bingley , but without seem to hav not what pass , took leav and rod on with his friend . mr. denny and mr. wickham walk with the young lady to the door of mr. phillip 's hous , and then mad their bow , in spit of miss lyd 's press entreaty that they should com in , and ev in spit of mrs. phillip 's throwing up the parlo window and loud second the invit . mrs. phillip was alway glad to see her niec ; and the two eldest , from their rec abs , wer particul welcom , and she was eag express her surpr at their sud return hom , which , as their own carry had not fetch them , she should hav known noth about , if she had not hap to see mr. jon 's shop-boy in the street , who had told her that they wer not to send any mor draught to netherfield becaus the miss bennet wer com away , when her civil was claim toward mr. collin by jan 's introduc of him . she receiv him with her very best polit , which he return with as much mor , apolog for his intrud , without any prevy acquaint with her , which he could not help flat himself , howev , might be just by his rel to the young lady who introduc him to her not . mrs. phillip was quit aw by such an excess of good bree ; but her contempl of on stranger was soon put to an end by exclam and inquiry about the oth ; of whom , howev , she could on tel her niec what they already knew , that mr. denny had brought him from london , and that he was to hav a lieut 's commit in the ——shire . she had been watch him the last hour , she said , as he walk up and down the street , and had mr. wickham appear , kitty and lyd would certain hav continu the occup , but unlucky no on pass window now exceiv a few of the off , who , in comparison with the stranger , wer becom `` stupid , disagr fellow . '' som of them wer to din with the phillips the next day , and their aunt prom to mak her husband cal on mr. wickham , and giv him an invit also , if the famy from longbourn would com in the ev . thi was agree to , and mrs. phillip protest that they would hav a nic comfort noisy gam of lottery ticket , and a littl bit of hot sup afterward . the prospect of such delight was very che , and they part in mut good spirit . mr. collin rep his apolog in quit the room , and was ass with unw civil that they wer perfect needless . as they walk hom , elizabe rel to jan what she had seen pass between the two gentlem ; but though jan would hav defend eith or both , had they appear to be in the wrong , she could no mor explain such behavio than her sist . mr. collin on his return high grat mrs. bennet by admir mrs. phillip 's man and polit . he protest that , exceiv lady catherin and her daught , he had nev seen a mor eleg wom ; for she had not on receiv him with the utmost civil , but ev point includ him in her invit for the next ev , although ut unknown to her bef . someth , he suppos , might be attribut to his connect with them , but yet he had nev met with so much at in the whol cours of his lif . chapt 16 as no object was mad to the young peopl 's eng with their aunt , and al mr. collin 's scruples of leav mr. and mrs. bennet for a singl ev dur his visit wer most steady resist , the coach convey him and his fiv cousin at a suit hour to meryton ; and the girl had the pleas of hear , as they ent the drawing-room , that mr. wickham had acceiv their unc 's invit , and was then in the hous . when thi inform was giv , and they had al tak their seat , mr. collin was at leis to look around him and admir , and he was so much struck with the siz and furnit of the apart , that he decl he might almost hav suppos himself in the smal sum breakfast parlo at ros ; a comparison that did not at first convey much grat ; but when mrs. phillip understood from him what ros was , and who was it proprietor—when she had list to the describ of on on of lady catherin 's drawing-rooms , and found that the chimney-piece alon had cost eight hundr pound , she felt al the forc of the comply , and would hard hav res a comparison with the housekeep 's room . in describ to her al the grand of lady catherin and her mand , with occas digress in pra of his own humbl abod , and the improv it was receiv , he was happy employ until the gentlem join them ; and he found in mrs. phillip a very at list , whos opin of his consequ increas with what she heard , and who was resolv to retail it al among her neighbo as soon as she could . to the girl , who could not list to their cousin , and who had noth to do but to wish for an instru , and examin their own indiff imit of chin on the mantelpiec , the interv of wait appear very long . it was ov at last , howev . the gentlem did approach , and when mr. wickham walk into the room , elizabe felt that she had neith been see him bef , nor think of him sint , with the smallest degr of unreason admir . the off of the ——shire wer in gen a very credit , gentlemanlik set , and the best of them wer of the pres party ; but mr. wickham was as far beyond them al in person , count , air , and walk , as they wer supery to the broad-fac , stuffy unc phillip , breath port win , who follow them into the room . mr. wickham was the happy man toward whom almost every fem ey was turn , and elizabe was the happy wom by whom he fin seat himself ; and the agr man in which he immedy fel into convers , though it was on on it being a wet night , mad her feel that the commonest , dullest , most threadbare top might be rend interest by the skil of the speak . with such riv for the not of the fair as mr. wickham and the off , mr. collin seem to sink into insign ; to the young lady he certain was noth ; but he had stil at interv a kind list in mrs. phillip , and was by her watch , most abund supply with coff and muffin . when the card-tables wer plac , he had the opportun of oblig her in turn , by sit down to whist . `` i know littl of the gam at pres , '' said he , `` but i shal be glad to improv myself , for in my situ in life— '' mrs. phillip was very glad for his comply , but could not wait for his reason . mr. wickham did not play at whist , and with ready delight was he receiv at the oth tabl between elizabe and lyd . at first ther seem dang of lyd 's engross him entir , for she was a most determin talk ; but being likew extrem fond of lottery ticket , she soon grew too much interest in the gam , too eag in mak bet and exclaim aft priz to hav at for anyon in particul . allow for the common demand of the gam , mr. wickham was theref at leis to talk to elizabe , and she was very wil to hear him , though what she chief wish to hear she could not hop to be told—the hist of his acquaint with mr. darcy . she dar not ev ment that gentlem . her curios , howev , was unexpect reliev . mr. wickham beg the subject himself . he inquir how far netherfield was from meryton ; and , aft receiv her answ , ask in a hesit man how long mr. darcy had been stay ther . `` about a mon , '' said elizabe ; and then , unwil to let the subject drop , ad , `` he is a man of very larg property in derbyshir , i understand . '' `` ye , '' reply mr. wickham ; `` his est ther is a nobl on . a clear ten thousand per ann . you could not hav met with a person mor cap of giv you certain inform on that head than myself , for i hav been connect with his famy in a particul man from my inf . '' elizabe could not but look surpr . `` you may wel be surpr , miss bennet , at such an assert , aft see , as you prob might , the very cold man of our meet yesterday . ar you much acquaint with mr . darcy ? '' `` as much as i ev wish to be , '' cri elizabe very warm . `` i hav spent four day in the sam hous with him , and i think him very disagr . '' `` i hav no right to giv my opin , '' said wickham , `` as to his being agr or otherw . i am not qual to form on . i hav known him too long and too wel to be a fair judg . it is imposs for me to be impart . but i believ yo opin of him would in gen astonish—and perhap you would not express it quit so strongly anywh els . her you ar in yo own famy . '' `` upon my word , i say no mor her than i might say in any hous in the neighbo , exceiv netherfield . he is not at al lik in hertfordshir . everybody is disgust with his prid . you wil not find him mor favo spok of by anyon . '' `` i can not pretend to be sorry , '' said wickham , aft a short interrupt , `` that he or that any man should not be estim beyond their desert ; but with him i believ it doe not oft hap . the world is blind by his fortun and consequ , or fright by his high and impos man , and see him on as he choos to be seen . '' `` i should tak him , ev on my slight acquaint , to be an ill-tempered man . '' wickham on shook his head . `` i wond , '' said he , at the next opportun of speak , `` wheth he is lik to be in thi country much long . '' `` i do not at al know ; but i heard noth of his going away when i was at netherfield . i hop yo plan in favo of the ——shire wil not be affect by his being in the neighbo . '' `` oh ! no—it is not for me to be driv away by mr. darcy . if he wish to avoid see me , he must go . we ar not on friend term , and it alway giv me pain to meet him , but i hav no reason for avoid him but what i might proclaim bef al the world , a sens of very gre ill-usage , and most pain regret at his being what he is . his fath , miss bennet , the lat mr. darcy , was on of the best men that ev breath , and the truest friend i ev had ; and i can nev be in company with thi mr. darcy without being griev to the soul by a thousand tend recollect . his behavio to myself has been scand ; but i very believ i could forg him anyth and everyth , rath than his disappoint the hop and disgrac the mem of his fath . '' elizabe found the interest of the subject increas , and list with al her heart ; but the del of it prev furth inquiry . mr. wickham beg to speak on mor gen top , meryton , the neighbo , the socy , appear high pleas with al that he had yet seen , and speak of the lat with gentl but very intellig gallantry . `` it was the prospect of const socy , and good socy , '' he ad , `` which was my chief induc to ent the ——shire . i knew it to be a most respect , agr corp , and my friend denny tempt me furth by his account of their pres quart , and the very gre at and excel acquaint meryton had proc them . socy , i own , is necess to me . i hav been a disappoint man , and my spirit wil not bear solitud . i must hav employ and socy . a milit lif is not what i was intend for , but circumst hav now mad it elig . the church ought to hav been my profession—i was brought up for the church , and i should at thi tim hav been in possess of a most valu liv , had it pleas the gentlem we wer speak of just now . '' `` indee ! '' `` yes—the lat mr. darcy bequeath me the next pres of the best liv in his gift . he was my godfath , and excess attach to me . i can not do just to his kind . he meant to provid for me amply , and thought he had don it ; but when the liv fel , it was giv elsewh . '' `` good heav ! '' cri elizabe ; `` but how could that be ? how could his wil be disregard ? why did you not seek leg redress ? '' `` ther was just such an inform in the term of the bequest as to giv me no hop from law . a man of hono could not hav doubt the int , but mr. darcy chos to doubt it—or to tre it as a mer condit recommend , and to assert that i had forfeit al claim to it by extrav , imprudence—in short anyth or noth . certain it is , that the liv becam vac two year ago , exact as i was of an ag to hold it , and that it was giv to anoth man ; and no less certain is it , that i can not accus myself of hav real don anyth to deserv to los it . i hav a warm , unguard temp , and i may hav spok my opin of him , and to him , too fre . i can recal noth wors . but the fact is , that we ar very diff sort of men , and that he hat me . '' `` thi is quit shock ! he deserv to be publ disgrac . '' `` som tim or oth he wil be—but it shal not be by me . til i can forget his fath , i can nev defy or expos him . '' elizabe hono him for such feel , and thought him handsom than ev as he express them . `` but what , '' said she , aft a paus , `` can hav been his mot ? what can hav induc him to behav so cruel ? '' `` a thorough , determin dislik of me—a dislik which i can not but attribut in som meas to jealousy . had the lat mr. darcy lik me less , his son might hav born with me bet ; but his fath 's uncommon attach to me irrit him , i believ , very ear in lif . he had not a temp to bear the sort of competit in which we stood—the sort of pref which was oft giv me . '' `` i had not thought mr. darcy so bad as this—though i hav nev lik him . i had not thought so very il of him . i had suppos him to be desp his fellow-creatures in gen , but did not suspect him of descend to such malicy reveng , such injust , such inhum as thi . '' aft a few minut ' reflect , howev , she continu , `` i do rememb his boast on day , at netherfield , of the implac of his res , of his hav an unforg temp . his disposit must be dread . '' `` i wil not trust myself on the subject , '' reply wickham ; `` i can hard be just to him . '' elizabe was again deep in thought , and aft a tim exclaim , `` to tre in such a man the godson , the friend , the favourit of his fath ! '' she could hav ad , `` a young man , too , lik you , whos very count may vouch for yo being amy '' —but she cont herself with , `` and on , too , who had prob been his comp from child , connect togeth , as i think you said , in the closest man ! '' `` we wer born in the sam par , within the sam park ; the greatest part of our you was pass togeth ; inm of the sam hous , shar the sam amus , object of the sam par car . my fath beg lif in the profess which yo unc , mr. phillip , appear to do so much credit to—but he gav up everyth to be of us to the lat mr. darcy and devot al his tim to the car of the pemberley property . he was most high esteem by mr. darcy , a most intim , confid friend . mr. darcy oft acknowledg himself to be und the greatest oblig to my fath 's act superintend , and when , immedy bef my fath 's dea , mr. darcy gav him a volunt prom of provid for me , i am convint that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitud to him , as of his affect to myself . '' `` how strange ! '' cri elizabe . `` how abomin ! i wond that the very prid of thi mr. darcy has not mad him just to you ! if from no bet mot , that he should not hav been too proud to be dishonest—for dishonesty i must cal it . '' `` it is wond , '' reply wickham , `` for almost al his act may be trac to prid ; and prid had oft been his best friend . it has connect him near with virtu than with any oth feel . but we ar non of us consist , and in his behavio to me ther wer stronger impuls ev than prid . '' `` can such abomin prid as his hav ev don him good ? '' `` ye . it has oft led him to be lib and gen , to giv his money fre , to display hospit , to assist his ten , and reliev the poor . famy prid , and fil pride—for he is very proud of what his fath was—have don thi . not to appear to disgrac his famy , to deg from the popul qual , or los the influ of the pemberley hous , is a pow mot . he has also broth prid , which , with som broth affect , mak him a very kind and car guard of his sist , and you wil hear him gen cri up as the most at and best of broth . '' `` what sort of girl is miss darcy ? '' he shook his head . `` i wish i could cal her amy . it giv me pain to speak il of a darcy . but she is too much lik her brother—very , very proud . as a child , she was affect and pleas , and extrem fond of me ; and i hav devot hour and hour to her amus . but she is noth to me now . she is a handsom girl , about fifteen or sixteen , and , i understand , high accompl . sint her fath 's dea , her hom has been london , wher a lady liv with her , and superintend her educ . '' aft many paus and many tri of oth subject , elizabe could not help revert ont mor to the first , and say : '' i am aston at his intim with mr. bingley ! how can mr. bingley , who seem good humo itself , and is , i real believ , tru amy , be in friend with such a man ? how can they suit each oth ? do you know mr . bingley ? '' `` not at al . '' `` he is a sweet-tempered , amy , charm man . he can not know what mr. darcy is . '' `` prob not ; but mr. darcy can pleas wher he choos . he doe not want abl . he can be a convers comp if he think it wor his whil . among thos who ar at al his eq in consequ , he is a very diff man from what he is to the less prosp . his prid nev desert him ; but with the rich he is liberal-minded , just , sint , rat , hono , and perhap agreeable—allowing someth for fortun and fig . '' the whist party soon afterward break up , the play gath round the oth tabl and mr. collin took his stat between his cousin elizabe and mrs. phillip . the us inquiry as to his success wer mad by the lat . it had not been very gre ; he had lost every point ; but when mrs. phillip beg to express her concern thereupon , he ass her with much earnest grav that it was not of the least import , that he consid the money as a mer trifl , and beg that she would not mak herself uneasy . `` i know very wel , madam , '' said he , `` that when person sit down to a card-table , they must tak their chant of thes thing , and happy i am not in such circumst as to mak fiv shil any object . ther ar undoubt many who could not say the sam , but thank to lady catherin de bourgh , i am remov far beyond the necess of regard littl mat . '' mr. wickham 's at was caught ; and aft observ mr. collin for a few mom , he ask elizabe in a low voic wheth her rel was very intim acquaint with the famy of de bourgh . `` lady catherin de bourgh , '' she reply , `` has very lat giv him a liv . i hard know how mr. collin was first introduc to her not , but he certain has not known her long . '' `` you know of cours that lady catherin de bourgh and lady an darcy wer sist ; consequ that she is aunt to the pres mr . darcy . '' `` no , indee , i did not . i knew noth at al of lady catherin 's connect . i nev heard of her ex til the day bef yesterday . '' `` her daught , miss de bourgh , wil hav a very larg fortun , and it is believ that she and her cousin wil unit the two est . '' thi inform mad elizabe smil , as she thought of poor miss bingley . vain indee must be al her at , vain and useless her affect for his sist and her pra of himself , if he wer already self-destined for anoth . `` mr. collin , '' said she , `` speak high both of lady catherin and her daught ; but from som particul that he has rel of her lady , i suspect his gratitud mislead him , and that in spit of her being his patro , she is an arrog , conceit wom . '' `` i believ her to be both in a gre degr , '' reply wickham ; `` i hav not seen her for many year , but i very wel rememb that i nev lik her , and that her man wer dict and insol . she has the reput of being remark sens and clev ; but i rath believ she der part of her abl from her rank and fortun , part from her authorit man , and the rest from the prid for her nephew , who choos that everyon connect with him should hav an understand of the first class . '' elizabe allow that he had giv a very rat account of it , and they continu talk togeth , with mut satisfact til sup put an end to card , and gav the rest of the lady their shar of mr. wickham 's at . ther could be no convers in the nois of mrs. phillip 's sup party , but his man recommend him to everybody . whatev he said , was said wel ; and whatev he did , don grac . elizabe went away with her head ful of him . she could think of noth but of mr. wickham , and of what he had told her , al the way hom ; but ther was not tim for her ev to ment his nam as they went , for neith lyd nor mr. collin wer ont sil . lyd talk incess of lottery ticket , of the fish she had lost and the fish she had won ; and mr. collin in describ the civil of mr. and mrs. phillip , protest that he did not in the least regard his loss at whist , enum al the dish at sup , and rep fear that he crowd his cousin , had mor to say than he could wel man bef the carry stop at longbourn hous . chapt 17 elizabe rel to jan the next day what had pass between mr. wickham and herself . jan list with aston and concern ; she knew not how to believ that mr. darcy could be so unworthy of mr. bingley 's regard ; and yet , it was not in her nat to quest the verac of a young man of such amy appear as wickham . the poss of his hav end such unkind , was enough to interest al her tend feel ; and noth remain theref to be don , but to think wel of them both , to defend the conduc of each , and throw into the account of accid or mistak whatev could not be otherw explain . `` they hav both , '' said she , `` been deceiv , i dar say , in som way or oth , of which we can form no ide . interest peopl hav perhap misrepres each to the oth . it is , in short , imposs for us to conject the caus or circumst which may hav aly them , without act blam on eith sid . '' `` very tru , indee ; and now , my dear jan , what hav you got to say on behalf of the interest peopl who hav prob been concern in the busy ? do clear them too , or we shal be oblig to think il of somebody . '' `` laugh as much as you choos , but you wil not laugh me out of my opin . my dearest lizzy , do but consid in what a disgrac light it plac mr. darcy , to be tre his fath 's favourit in such a man , on whom his fath had prom to provid for . it is imposs . no man of common hum , no man who had any valu for his charact , could be cap of it . can his most intim friend be so excess deceiv in him ? oh ! no . '' `` i can much mor easy believ mr. bingley 's being impos on , than that mr. wickham should inv such a hist of himself as he gav me last night ; nam , fact , everyth ment without ceremony . if it be not so , let mr. darcy contradict it . besid , ther was tru in his look . '' `` it is difficult indeed—it is distress . on doe not know what to think . '' `` i beg yo pardon ; on know exact what to think . '' but jan could think with certainty on on on point—th mr. bingley , if he had been impos on , would hav much to suff when the affair becam publ . the two young lady wer summon from the shrubbery , wher thi convers pass , by the ar of the very person of whom they had been speak ; mr. bingley and his sist cam to giv their person invit for the long-expected bal at netherfield , which was fix for the follow tuesday . the two lady wer delight to see their dear friend again , cal it an ag sint they had met , and rep ask what she had been doing with herself sint their sep . to the rest of the famy they paid littl at ; avoid mrs. bennet as much as poss , say not much to elizabe , and noth at al to the oth . they wer soon gon again , ris from their seat with an act which took their broth by surpr , and hurry off as if eag to escap from mrs. bennet 's civil . the prospect of the netherfield bal was extrem agr to every fem of the famy . mrs. bennet chos to consid it as giv in comply to her eldest daught , and was particul flat by receiv the invit from mr. bingley himself , instead of a ceremony card . jan pict to herself a happy ev in the socy of her two friend , and the at of their broth ; and elizabe thought with pleas of dant a gre deal with mr. wickham , and of see a confirm of everyth in mr. darcy 's look and behavio . the happy anticip by catherin and lyd depend less on any singl ev , or any particul person , for though they each , lik elizabe , meant to dant half the ev with mr. wickham , he was by no mean the on partn who could satisfy them , and a bal was , at any rat , a bal . and ev mary could ass her famy that she had no disinclin for it . `` whil i can hav my morn to myself , '' said she , `` it is enough—i think it is no sacr to join occas in ev eng . socy has claim on us al ; and i profess myself on of thos who consid interv of recr and amus as desir for everybody . '' elizabe 's spirit wer so high on thi occas , that though she did not oft speak unnecess to mr. collin , she could not help ask him wheth he intend to acceiv mr. bingley 's invit , and if he did , wheth he would think it prop to join in the ev 's amus ; and she was rath surpr to find that he entertain no scruple whatev on that head , and was very far from dread a rebuk eith from the archbishop , or lady catherin de bourgh , by vent to dant . `` i am by no mean of the opin , i ass you , '' said he , `` that a bal of thi kind , giv by a young man of charact , to respect peopl , can hav any evil tend ; and i am so far from object to dant myself , that i shal hop to be hono with the hand of al my fair cousin in the cours of the ev ; and i tak thi opportun of solicit yo , miss elizabe , for the two first dant espec , a pref which i trust my cousin jan wil attribut to the right caus , and not to any disrespect for her . '' elizabe felt herself complet tak in . she had ful propos being eng by mr. wickham for thos very dant ; and to hav mr. collin instead ! her liv had nev been wors tim . ther was no help for it , howev . mr. wickham 's happy and her own wer perforc delay a littl long , and mr. collin 's propos acceiv with as good a grac as she could . she was not the bet pleas with his gallantry from the ide it suggest of someth mor . it now first struck her , that she was select from among her sist as worthy of being mistress of hunsford parson , and of assist to form a quadril tabl at ros , in the abs of mor elig visit . the ide soon reach to convict , as she observ his increas civil toward herself , and heard his frequ attempt at a comply on her wit and vivac ; and though mor aston than grat herself by thi effect of her charm , it was not long bef her moth gav her to understand that the prob of their marry was extrem agr to her . elizabe , howev , did not choos to tak the hint , being wel aw that a sery disput must be the consequ of any reply . mr. collin might nev mak the off , and til he did , it was useless to quarrel about him . if ther had not been a netherfield bal to prep for and talk of , the young miss bennet would hav been in a very pity stat at thi tim , for from the day of the invit , to the day of the bal , ther was such a success of rain as prev their walk to meryton ont . no aunt , no off , no new could be sought after—the very shoe-roses for netherfield wer got by proxy . ev elizabe might hav found som tri of her paty in weath which tot suspend the improv of her acquaint with mr. wickham ; and noth less than a dant on tuesday , could hav mad such a friday , saturday , sunday , and monday end to kitty and lyd . chapt 18 til elizabe ent the drawing-room at netherfield , and look in vain for mr. wickham among the clust of red coat ther assembl , a doubt of his being pres had nev occur to her . the certainty of meet him had not been check by any of thos recollect that might not unreason hav alarm her . she had dress with mor than us car , and prep in the highest spirit for the conquest of al that remain unsubdu of his heart , trust that it was not mor than might be won in the cours of the ev . but in an inst aros the dread susp of his being purpos omit for mr. darcy 's pleas in the bingley ' invit to the off ; and though thi was not exact the cas , the absolv fact of his abs was pronount by his friend denny , to whom lyd eag apply , and who told them that wickham had been oblig to go to town on busy the day bef , and was not yet return ; ad , with a sign smil , `` i do not imagin his busy would hav cal him away just now , if he had not want to avoid a certain gentlem her . '' thi part of his intellig , though unheard by lyd , was caught by elizabe , and , as it ass her that darcy was not less answ for wickham 's abs than if her first surm had been just , every feel of displeas against the form was so sharp by immedy disappoint , that she could hard reply with tol civil to the polit inquiry which he direct afterward approach to mak . attend , forbear , paty with darcy , was injury to wickham . she was resolv against any sort of convers with him , and turn away with a degr of ill-humour which she could not whol surmount ev in speak to mr. bingley , whos blind part provok her . but elizabe was not form for ill-humour ; and though every prospect of her own was destroy for the ev , it could not dwel long on her spirit ; and hav told al her grief to charlot luca , whom she had not seen for a week , she was soon abl to mak a volunt transit to the od of her cousin , and to point him out to her particul not . the first two dant , howev , brought a return of distress ; they wer dant of mort . mr. collin , awkward and solemn , apolog instead of attend , and oft mov wrong without being aw of it , gav her al the sham and misery which a disagr partn for a coupl of dant can giv . the mom of her releas from him was ecstasy . she dant next with an off , and had the refresh of talk of wickham , and of hear that he was univers lik . when thos dant wer ov , she return to charlot luca , and was in convers with her , when she found herself sud address by mr. darcy who took her so much by surpr in his apply for her hand , that , without know what she did , she acceiv him . he walk away again immedy , and she was left to fret ov her own want of pres of mind ; charlot tri to consol her : '' i dar say you wil find him very agr . '' `` heav forbid ! that would be the greatest misfortun of al ! to find a man agr whom on is determin to hat ! do not wish me such an evil . '' when the dant recom , howev , and darcy approach to claim her hand , charlot could not help caut her in a whisp , not to be a simpleton , and allow her fant for wickham to mak her appear unpleas in the ey of a man ten tim his consequ . elizabe mad no answ , and took her plac in the set , amaz at the dign to which she was ar in being allow to stand opposit to mr. darcy , and read in her neighbo ' look , their eq amaz in behold it . they stood for som tim without speak a word ; and she beg to imagin that their sil was to last through the two dant , and at first was resolv not to break it ; til sud fant that it would be the gre pun to her partn to oblig him to talk , she mad som slight observ on the dant . he reply , and was again sil . aft a paus of som minut , she address him a second tim with : — '' it is yo turn to say someth now , mr. darcy . i talk about the dant , and you ought to mak som sort of remark on the siz of the room , or the numb of coupl . '' he smil , and ass her that whatev she wish him to say should be said . `` very wel . that reply wil do for the pres . perhap by and by i may observ that priv bal ar much pleas than publ on . but now we may be sil . '' `` do you talk by rul , then , whil you ar dant ? '' `` sometim . on must speak a littl , you know . it would look od to be entir sil for half an hour togeth ; and yet for the adv of som , convers ought to be so arrang , as that they may hav the troubl of say as littl as poss . '' `` ar you consult yo own feel in the pres cas , or do you imagin that you ar grat min ? '' `` both , '' reply elizabe arch ; `` for i hav alway seen a gre simil in the turn of our mind . we ar each of an unsoc , taciturn disposit , unwil to speak , unless we expect to say someth that wil amaz the whol room , and be hand down to post with al the ec of a proverb . '' `` thi is no very striking resembl of yo own charact , i am sur , '' said he . `` how near it may be to min , i can not pretend to say . you think it a faith portrait undoubt . '' `` i must not decid on my own perform . '' he mad no answ , and they wer again sil til they had gon down the dant , when he ask her if she and her sist did not very oft walk to meryton . she answ in the affirm , and , un to resist the tempt , ad , `` when you met us ther the oth day , we had just been form a new acquaint . '' the effect was immedy . a deep shad of haut overspread his feat , but he said not a word , and elizabe , though blam herself for her own weak , could not go on . at leng darcy spok , and in a constrain man said , `` mr. wickham is bless with such happy man as may ens his mak friends—whether he may be eq cap of retain them , is less certain . '' `` he has been so unlucky as to los yo friend , '' reply elizabe with emphas , `` and in a man which he is lik to suff from al his lif . '' darcy mad no answ , and seem desir of chang the subject . at that mom , sir william luca appear clos to them , mean to pass through the set to the oth sid of the room ; but on perceiv mr. darcy , he stop with a bow of supery courtesy to comply him on his dant and his partn . `` i hav been most high grat indee , my dear sir . such very supery dant is not oft seen . it is evid that you belong to the first circ . allow me to say , howev , that yo fair partn doe not disgrac you , and that i must hop to hav thi pleas oft rep , espec when a certain desir ev , my dear eliz ( glant at her sist and bingley ) shal tak plac . what congrat wil then flow in ! i ap to mr. darcy : —but let me not interrupt you , sir . you wil not thank me for detain you from the bewitch convers of that young lady , whos bright ey ar also upbraid me . '' the lat part of thi address was scarc heard by darcy ; but sir william 's allud to his friend seem to strike him forc , and his ey wer direct with a very sery express toward bingley and jan , who wer dant togeth . recov himself , howev , short , he turn to his partn , and said , `` sir william 's interrupt has mad me forget what we wer talk of . '' `` i do not think we wer speak at al . sir william could not hav interrupt two peopl in the room who had less to say for themselv . we hav tri two or three subject already without success , and what we ar to talk of next i can not imagin . '' `` what think you of book ? '' said he , smil . `` books—oh ! no . i am sur we nev read the sam , or not with the sam feel . '' `` i am sorry you think so ; but if that be the cas , ther can at least be no want of subject . we may comp our diff opin . '' `` no—i can not talk of book in a ball-room ; my head is alway ful of someth els . '' `` the pres alway occupy you in such scenes—doe it ? '' said he , with a look of doubt . `` ye , alway , '' she reply , without know what she said , for her thought had wand far from the subject , as soon afterward appear by her sud exclaim , `` i rememb hear you ont say , mr. darcy , that you hard ev forgav , that yo res ont cre was unappeas . you ar very cauty , i suppos , as to it being cre . '' `` i am , '' said he , with a firm voic . `` and nev allow yourself to be blind by prejud ? '' `` i hop not . '' `` it is particul incumb on thos who nev chang their opin , to be sec of judg prop at first . '' `` may i ask to what thes quest tend ? '' `` mer to the illust of yo charact , '' said she , endeavo to shak off her grav . `` i am try to mak it out . '' `` and what is yo success ? '' she shook her head . `` i do not get on at al . i hear such diff account of you as puzzl me excess . '' `` i can ready believ , '' answ he grav , `` that report may vary gre with respect to me ; and i could wish , miss bennet , that you wer not to sketch my charact at the pres mom , as ther is reason to fear that the perform would reflect no credit on eith . '' `` but if i do not tak yo lik now , i may nev hav anoth opportun . '' `` i would by no mean suspend any pleas of yo , '' he cold reply . she said no mor , and they went down the oth dant and part in sil ; and on each sid dissatisfy , though not to an eq degr , for in darcy 's breast ther was a tol pow feel toward her , which soon proc her pardon , and direct al his ang against anoth . they had not long sep , when miss bingley cam toward her , and with an express of civil disdain accost her : '' so , miss eliz , i hear you ar quit delight with georg wickham ! yo sist has been talk to me about him , and ask me a thousand quest ; and i find that the young man quit forgot to tel you , among his oth commun , that he was the son of old wickham , the lat mr. darcy 's steward . let me recommend you , howev , as a friend , not to giv implicit confid to al his assert ; for as to mr. darcy 's us him il , it is perfect fals ; for , on the cont , he has alway been remark kind to him , though georg wickham has tre mr. darcy in a most infam man . i do not know the particul , but i know very wel that mr. darcy is not in the least to blam , that he can not bear to hear georg wickham ment , and that though my broth thought that he could not wel avoid includ him in his invit to the off , he was excess glad to find that he had tak himself out of the way . his com into the country at al is a most insol thing , indee , and i wond how he could presum to do it . i pity you , miss eliz , for thi discovery of yo favourit 's guilt ; but real , consid his desc , on could not expect much bet . '' `` his guilt and his desc appear by yo account to be the sam , '' said elizabe angry ; `` for i hav heard you accus him of noth wors than of being the son of mr. darcy 's steward , and of that , i can ass you , he inform me himself . '' `` i beg yo pardon , '' reply miss bingley , turn away with a sne . `` excus my interference—it was kind meant . '' `` insol girl ! '' said elizabe to herself . `` you ar much mistak if you expect to influ me by such a paltry attack as thi . i see noth in it but yo own wil ign and the mal of mr . darcy . '' she then sought her eldest sist , who had undertak to mak inquiry on the sam subject of bingley . jan met her with a smil of such sweet complac , a glow of such happy express , as sufficy mark how wel she was satisfy with the occur of the ev . elizabe inst read her feel , and at that mom solicitud for wickham , res against his enemy , and everyth els , gav way bef the hop of jan 's being in the fairest way for happy . `` i want to know , '' said she , with a count no less smil than her sist 's , `` what you hav learnt about mr. wickham . but perhap you hav been too pleas eng to think of any third person ; in which cas you may be sur of my pardon . '' `` no , '' reply jan , `` i hav not forgot him ; but i hav noth satisfact to tel you . mr. bingley doe not know the whol of his hist , and is quit ign of the circumst which hav princip offend mr. darcy ; but he wil vouch for the good conduc , the prob , and hono of his friend , and is perfect convint that mr. wickham has deserv much less at from mr. darcy than he has receiv ; and i am sorry to say by his account as wel as his sist 's , mr. wickham is by no mean a respect young man . i am afraid he has been very imprud , and has deserv to los mr. darcy 's regard . '' `` mr. bingley doe not know mr. wickham himself ? '' `` no ; he nev saw him til the oth morn at meryton . '' `` thi account then is what he has receiv from mr. darcy . i am satisfy . but what doe he say of the liv ? '' `` he doe not exact recollect the circumst , though he has heard them from mr. darcy mor than ont , but he believ that it was left to him condit on . '' `` i hav not a doubt of mr. bingley 's sint , '' said elizabe warm ; `` but you must excus my not being convint by ass on . mr. bingley 's defens of his friend was a very abl on , i dar say ; but sint he is unacquaint with sev part of the story , and has learnt the rest from that friend himself , i shal vent to stil think of both gentlem as i did bef . '' she then chang the discours to on mor grat to each , and on which ther could be no diff of senty . elizabe list with delight to the happy , though modest hop which jan entertain of mr. bingley 's regard , and said al in her pow to height her confid in it . on their being join by mr. bingley himself , elizabe withdrew to miss luca ; to whos inquiry aft the pleas of her last partn she had scarc reply , bef mr. collin cam up to them , and told her with gre exult that he had just been so fortun as to mak a most import discovery . `` i hav found out , '' said he , `` by a singul accid , that ther is now in the room a near rel of my patro . i hap to overhear the gentlem himself ment to the young lady who doe the hono of the hous the nam of his cousin miss de bourgh , and of her moth lady catherin . how wond thes sort of thing occ ! who would hav thought of my meet with , perhap , a nephew of lady catherin de bourgh in thi assembl ! i am most thank that the discovery is mad in tim for me to pay my respect to him , which i am now going to do , and trust he wil excus my not hav don it bef . my tot ign of the connect must plead my apolog . '' `` you ar not going to introduc yourself to mr . darcy ! '' `` indee i am . i shal ent his pardon for not hav don it ear . i believ him to be lady catherin 's nephew . it wil be in my pow to ass him that her lady was quit wel yesterday se'nnight . '' elizabe tri hard to dissuad him from such a scheme , ass him that mr. darcy would consid his address him without introduc as an impertin freedom , rath than a comply to his aunt ; that it was not in the least necess ther should be any not on eith sid ; and that if it wer , it must belong to mr. darcy , the supery in consequ , to begin the acquaint . mr. collin list to her with the determin air of follow his own inclin , and , when she ceas speak , reply thu : '' my dear miss elizabe , i hav the highest opin in the world in yo excel judg in al mat within the scop of yo understand ; but permit me to say , that ther must be a wid diff between the est form of ceremony amongst the laity , and thos which reg the clergy ; for , giv me leav to observ that i consid the cler off as eq in point of dign with the highest rank in the kingdom—provided that a prop humil of behavio is at the sam tim maintain . you must theref allow me to follow the dict of my conscy on thi occas , which lead me to perform what i look on as a point of duty . pardon me for neglect to profit by yo adv , which on every oth subject shal be my const guid , though in the cas bef us i consid myself mor fit by educ and habit study to decid on what is right than a young lady lik yourself . '' and with a low bow he left her to attack mr. darcy , whos receiv of his adv she eag watch , and whos aston at being so address was very evid . her cousin prefac his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it , she felt as if hear it al , and saw in the mot of his lip the word `` apolog , '' `` hunsford , '' and `` lady catherin de bourgh . '' it vex her to see him expos himself to such a man . mr. darcy was ey him with unrestrain wond , and when at last mr. collin allow him tim to speak , reply with an air of dist civil . mr. collin , howev , was not disco from speak again , and mr. darcy 's contempt seem abund increas with the leng of his second speech , and at the end of it he on mad him a slight bow , and mov anoth way . mr. collin then return to elizabe . `` i hav no reason , i ass you , '' said he , `` to be dissatisfy with my receiv . mr. darcy seem much pleas with the at . he answ me with the utmost civil , and ev paid me the comply of say that he was so wel convint of lady catherin 's discern as to be certain she could nev bestow a favo unworthy . it was real a very handsom thought . upon the whol , i am much pleas with him . '' as elizabe had no long any interest of her own to pursu , she turn her at almost entir on her sist and mr. bingley ; and the train of agr reflect which her observ gav bir to , mad her perhap almost as happy as jan . she saw her in ide settl in that very hous , in al the fel which a marry of tru affect could bestow ; and she felt cap , und such circumst , of endeavo ev to lik bingley 's two sist . her moth 's thought she plain saw wer bent the sam way , and she determin not to vent near her , lest she might hear too much . when they sat down to sup , theref , she consid it a most unlucky pervers which plac them within on of each oth ; and deeply was she vex to find that her moth was talk to that on person ( lady luca ) fre , op , and of noth els but her expect that jan would soon be marry to mr. bingley . it was an anim subject , and mrs. bennet seem incap of fatigu whil enum the adv of the match . his being such a charm young man , and so rich , and liv but three mil from them , wer the first point of self-gratulation ; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sist wer of jan , and to be certain that they must desir the connect as much as she could do . it was , moreov , such a prom thing for her young daught , as jan 's marry so gre must throw them in the way of oth rich men ; and last , it was so pleas at her tim of lif to be abl to consign her singl daught to the car of their sist , that she might not be oblig to go into company mor than she lik . it was necess to mak thi circumst a mat of pleas , becaus on such occas it is the etiquet ; but no on was less lik than mrs. bennet to find comfort in stay hom at any period of her lif . she conclud with many good wish that lady luca might soon be eq fortun , though evid and triumph believ ther was no chant of it . in vain did elizabe endeavo to check the rapid of her moth 's word , or persuad her to describ her fel in a less aud whisp ; for , to her inexpress vex , she could perceiv that the chief of it was overheard by mr. darcy , who sat opposit to them . her moth on scold her for being nonsens . `` what is mr. darcy to me , pray , that i should be afraid of him ? i am sur we ow him no such particul civil as to be oblig to say noth he may not lik to hear . '' `` for heav 's sak , madam , speak low . what adv can it be for you to offend mr. darcy ? you wil nev recommend yourself to his friend by so doing ! '' noth that she could say , howev , had any influ . her moth would talk of her view in the sam intellig ton . elizabe blush and blush again with sham and vex . she could not help frequ glant her ey at mr. darcy , though every glant convint her of what she dread ; for though he was not alway look at her moth , she was convint that his at was invary fix by her . the express of his fac chang grad from indign contempt to a compos and steady grav . at leng , howev , mrs. bennet had no mor to say ; and lady luca , who had been long yawn at the repetit of delight which she saw no lik of shar , was left to the comfort of cold ham and chick . elizabe now beg to rev . but not long was the interv of tranquil ; for , when sup was ov , sing was talk of , and she had the mort of see mary , aft very littl entreaty , prep to oblig the company . by many sign look and sil entreaty , did she endeavo to prev such a proof of compla , but in vain ; mary would not understand them ; such an opportun of exhibit was delight to her , and she beg her song . elizabe 's ey wer fix on her with most pain sens , and she watch her progress through the sev stanza with an impaty which was very il reward at their clos ; for mary , on receiv , amongst the thank of the tabl , the hint of a hop that she might be prevail on to favo them again , aft the paus of half a minut beg anoth . mary 's pow wer by no mean fit for such a display ; her voic was weak , and her man affect . elizabe was in agony . she look at jan , to see how she bor it ; but jan was very compos talk to bingley . she look at his two sist , and saw them mak sign of derid at each oth , and at darcy , who continu , howev , imperturb grav . she look at her fath to ent his interf , lest mary should be sing al night . he took the hint , and when mary had fin her second song , said aloud , `` that wil do extrem wel , child . you hav delight us long enough . let the oth young lady hav tim to exhibit . '' mary , though pretend not to hear , was somewh disconcert ; and elizabe , sorry for her , and sorry for her fath 's speech , was afraid her anxy had don no good . oth of the party wer now apply to . `` if i , '' said mr. collin , `` wer so fortun as to be abl to sing , i should hav gre pleas , i am sur , in oblig the company with an air ; for i consid mus as a very innoc divert , and perfect compat with the profess of a clergym . i do not mean , howev , to assert that we can be just in devot too much of our tim to mus , for ther ar certain oth thing to be attend to . the rect of a par has much to do . in the first plac , he must mak such an agr for tith as may be benef to himself and not offend to his patron . he must writ his own sermon ; and the tim that remain wil not be too much for his par duty , and the car and improv of his dwel , which he can not be excus from mak as comfort as poss . and i do not think it of light import that he should hav at and cont man toward everybody , espec toward thos to whom he ow his pref . i can not acquit him of that duty ; nor could i think wel of the man who should omit an occas of test his respect toward anybody connect with the famy . '' and with a bow to mr. darcy , he conclud his speech , which had been spok so loud as to be heard by half the room . many stared—many smil ; but no on look mor amus than mr. bennet himself , whil his wif sery commend mr. collin for hav spok so sens , and observ in a half-whisper to lady luca , that he was a remark clev , good kind of young man . to elizabe it appear that , had her famy mad an agr to expos themselv as much as they could dur the ev , it would hav been imposs for them to play their part with mor spirit or fin success ; and happy did she think it for bingley and her sist that som of the exhibit had escap his not , and that his feel wer not of a sort to be much distress by the fol which he must hav wit . that his two sist and mr. darcy , howev , should hav such an opportun of ridic her rel , was bad enough , and she could not determin wheth the sil contempt of the gentlem , or the insol smil of the lady , wer mor intol . the rest of the ev brought her littl amus . she was teas by mr. collin , who continu most persev by her sid , and though he could not prevail on her to dant with him again , put it out of her pow to dant with oth . in vain did she ent him to stand up with somebody els , and off to introduc him to any young lady in the room . he ass her , that as to dant , he was perfect indiff to it ; that his chief object was by del at to recommend himself to her and that he should theref mak a point of remain clos to her the whol ev . ther was no argu upon such a project . she ow her greatest reliev to her friend miss luca , who oft join them , and good-naturedly eng mr. collin 's convers to herself . she was at least fre from the offens of mr. darcy 's furth not ; though oft stand within a very short dist of her , quit diseng , he nev cam near enough to speak . she felt it to be the prob consequ of her allud to mr. wickham , and rejo in it . the longbourn party wer the last of al the company to depart , and , by a manoeuvr of mrs. bennet , had to wait for their carry a quart of an hour aft everybody els was gon , which gav them tim to see how hearty they wer wish away by som of the famy . mrs. hurst and her sist scarc op their mouth , exceiv to complain of fatigu , and wer evid impaty to hav the hous to themselv . they repuls every attempt of mrs. bennet at convers , and by so doing threw a langu ov the whol party , which was very littl reliev by the long speech of mr. collin , who was comply mr. bingley and his sist on the eleg of their entertain , and the hospit and polit which had mark their behavio to their guest . darcy said noth at al . mr. bennet , in eq sil , was enjoy the scen . mr. bingley and jan wer stand togeth , a littl detach from the rest , and talk on to each oth . elizabe preserv as steady a sil as eith mrs. hurst or miss bingley ; and ev lyd was too much fatigu to ut mor than the occas exclam of `` lord , how tir i am ! '' accompany by a viol yawn . when at leng they aros to tak leav , mrs. bennet was most press civil in her hop of see the whol famy soon at longbourn , and address herself espec to mr. bingley , to ass him how happy he would mak them by eat a famy din with them at any tim , without the ceremony of a form invit . bingley was al grat pleas , and he ready eng for tak the earliest opportun of wait on her , aft his return from london , whith he was oblig to go the next day for a short tim . mrs. bennet was perfect satisfy , and quit the hous und the delight persuas that , allow for the necess prep of settl , new carry , and wed cloth , she should undoubt see her daught settl at netherfield in the cours of three or four month . of hav anoth daught marry to mr. collin , she thought with eq certainty , and with consid , though not eq , pleas . elizabe was the least dear to her of al her childr ; and though the man and the match wer quit good enough for her , the wor of each was eclips by mr. bingley and netherfield . chapt 19 the next day op a new scen at longbourn . mr. collin mad his decl in form . hav resolv to do it without loss of tim , as his leav of abs extend on to the follow saturday , and hav no feel of diffid to mak it distress to himself ev at the mom , he set about it in a very ord man , with al the observ , which he suppos a regul part of the busy . on find mrs. bennet , elizabe , and on of the young girl togeth , soon aft breakfast , he address the moth in thes word : '' may i hop , madam , for yo interest with yo fair daught elizabe , when i solicit for the hono of a priv audy with her in the cours of thi morn ? '' bef elizabe had tim for anyth but a blush of surpr , mrs. bennet answ inst , `` oh dear ! —yes—certainly . i am sur lizzy wil be very happy—i am sur she can hav no object . com , kitty , i want you up stair . '' and , gath her work togeth , she was hast away , when elizabe cal out : '' dear madam , do not go . i beg you wil not go . mr. collin must excus me . he can hav noth to say to me that anybody nee not hear . i am going away myself . '' `` no , no , nonsens , lizzy . i desir you to stay wher you ar . '' and upon elizabe 's seem real , with vex and embarrass look , about to escap , she ad : `` lizzy , i insist upon yo stay and hear mr . collin . '' elizabe would not oppos such an injunction—and a mom 's consid mak her also sens that it would be wisest to get it ov as soon and as quiet as poss , she sat down again and tri to cont , by incess employ the feel which wer divid between distress and divert . mrs. bennet and kitty walk off , and as soon as they wer gon , mr. collin beg . `` believ me , my dear miss elizabe , that yo modesty , so far from doing you any disserv , rath ad to yo oth perfect . you would hav been less amy in my ey had ther not been thi littl unwil ; but allow me to ass you , that i hav yo respect moth 's permit for thi address . you can hard doubt the purport of my discours , howev yo nat del may lead you to dissembl ; my at hav been too mark to be mistak . almost as soon as i ent the hous , i singl you out as the comp of my fut lif . but bef i am run away with by my feel on thi subject , perhap it would be adv for me to stat my reason for marrying—and , moreov , for com into hertfordshir with the design of select a wif , as i certain did . '' the ide of mr. collin , with al his solemn compos , being run away with by his feel , mad elizabe so near laugh , that she could not us the short paus he allow in any attempt to stop him furth , and he continu : '' my reason for marry ar , first , that i think it a right thing for every clergym in easy circumst ( lik myself ) to set the exampl of matrimony in his par ; second , that i am convint that it wil ad very gre to my happy ; and thirdly—which perhap i ought to hav ment ear , that it is the particul adv and recommend of the very nobl lady whom i hav the hono of cal patro . twic has she condescend to giv me her opin ( unask too ! ) on thi subject ; and it was but the very saturday night bef i left hunsford—between our pool at quadril , whil mrs. jenkinson was arrang miss de bourgh 's footstool , that she said , 'mr . collin , you must marry . a clergym lik you must marry . choos prop , choos a gentlewom for my sak ; and for yo own , let her be an act , us sort of person , not brought up high , but abl to mak a smal incom go a good way . thi is my adv . find such a wom as soon as you can , bring her to hunsford , and i wil visit her . ' allow me , by the way , to observ , my fair cousin , that i do not reckon the not and kind of lady catherin de bourgh as among the least of the adv in my pow to off . you wil find her man beyond anyth i can describ ; and yo wit and vivac , i think , must be acceiv to her , espec when temp with the sil and respect which her rank wil inevit excit . thu much for my gen int in favo of matrimony ; it remain to be told why my view wer direct toward longbourn instead of my own neighbo , wher i can ass you ther ar many amy young wom . but the fact is , that being , as i am , to inherit thi est aft the dea of yo hono fath ( who , howev , may liv many year long ) , i could not satisfy myself without resolv to choos a wif from among his daught , that the loss to them might be as littl as poss , when the melancho ev tak place—which , howev , as i hav already said , may not be for sev year . thi has been my mot , my fair cousin , and i flat myself it wil not sink me in yo esteem . and now noth remain for me but to ass you in the most anim langu of the viol of my affect . to fortun i am perfect indiff , and shal mak no demand of that nat on yo fath , sint i am wel aw that it could not be comply with ; and that on thousand pound in the four per cent , which wil not be yo til aft yo moth 's deceas , is al that you may ev be entitl to . on that head , theref , i shal be uniform sil ; and you may ass yourself that no ung reproach shal ev pass my lip when we ar marry . '' it was absolv necess to interrupt him now . `` you ar too hasty , sir , '' she cri . `` you forget that i hav mad no answ . let me do it without furth loss of tim . acceiv my thank for the comply you ar pay me . i am very sens of the hono of yo propos , but it is imposs for me to do otherw than to declin them . '' `` i am not now to learn , '' reply mr. collin , with a form wav of the hand , `` that it is us with young lady to reject the address of the man whom they secret mean to acceiv , when he first apply for their favo ; and that sometim the refus is rep a second , or ev a third tim . i am theref by no mean disco by what you hav just said , and shal hop to lead you to the alt er long . '' `` upon my word , sir , '' cri elizabe , `` yo hop is a rath extraordin on aft my decl . i do ass you that i am not on of thos young lady ( if such young lady ther ar ) who ar so dar as to risk their happy on the chant of being ask a second tim . i am perfect sery in my refus . you could not mak me happy , and i am convint that i am the last wom in the world who could mak you so . nay , wer yo friend lady catherin to know me , i am persuad she would find me in every respect il qual for the situ . '' `` wer it certain that lady catherin would think so , '' said mr. collin very gravely— '' but i can not imagin that her lady would at al disapprov of you . and you may be certain when i hav the hono of see her again , i shal speak in the very highest term of yo modesty , econom , and oth amy qual . '' `` indee , mr. collin , al pra of me wil be unnecess . you must giv me leav to judg for myself , and pay me the comply of believ what i say . i wish you very happy and very rich , and by refus yo hand , do al in my pow to prev yo being otherw . in mak me the off , you must hav satisfy the del of yo feel with regard to my famy , and may tak possess of longbourn est whenev it fal , without any self-reproach . thi mat may be consid , theref , as fin settl . '' and ris as she thu spok , she would hav quit the room , had mr. collin not thu address her : '' when i do myself the hono of speak to you next on the subject , i shal hop to receiv a mor favo answ than you hav now giv me ; though i am far from accus you of cruel at pres , becaus i know it to be the est custom of yo sex to reject a man on the first apply , and perhap you hav ev now said as much to enco my suit as would be consist with the tru del of the fem charact . '' `` real , mr. collin , '' cri elizabe with som warm , `` you puzzl me excess . if what i hav hitherto said can appear to you in the form of enco , i know not how to express my refus in such a way as to convint you of it being on . '' `` you must giv me leav to flat myself , my dear cousin , that yo refus of my address is mer word of cours . my reason for believ it ar brief thes : it doe not appear to me that my hand is unworthy of yo acceiv , or that the est i can off would be any oth than high desir . my situ in lif , my connect with the famy of de bourgh , and my rel to yo own , ar circumst high in my favo ; and you should tak it into furth consid , that in spit of yo manifold attract , it is by no mean certain that anoth off of marry may ev be mad you . yo port is unhappy so smal that it wil in al lik undo the effect of yo lov and amy qual . as i must theref conclud that you ar not sery in yo reject of me , i shal choos to attribut it to yo wish of increas my lov by suspens , accord to the us pract of eleg fem . '' `` i do ass you , sir , that i hav no pretend whatev to that kind of eleg which consist in tor a respect man . i would rath be paid the comply of being believ sint . i thank you again and again for the hono you hav don me in yo propos , but to acceiv them is absolv imposs . my feel in every respect forbid it . can i speak plain ? do not consid me now as an eleg fem , intend to plagu you , but as a rat cre , speak the tru from her heart . '' `` you ar uniform charm ! '' cri he , with an air of awkward gallantry ; `` and i am persuad that when sanct by the express auth of both yo excel par , my propos wil not fail of being acceiv . '' to such persev in wil self-deception elizabe would mak no reply , and immedy and in sil withdrew ; determin , if he persist in consid her rep refus as flat enco , to apply to her fath , whos neg might be ut in such a man as to be decid , and whos behavio at least could not be mistak for the affect and coquetry of an eleg fem . chapt 20 mr. collin was not left long to the sil contempl of his success lov ; for mrs. bennet , hav dawdl about in the vestib to watch for the end of the conf , no soon saw elizabe op the door and with quick step pass her toward the staircas , than she ent the breakfast-room , and congrat both him and herself in warm term on the happy prospect of their near connect . mr. collin receiv and return thes felicit with eq pleas , and then process to rel the particul of their interview , with the result of which he trust he had every reason to be satisfy , sint the refus which his cousin had steadfast giv him would nat flow from her bash modesty and the genuin del of her charact . thi inform , howev , startl mrs. bennet ; she would hav been glad to be eq satisfy that her daught had meant to enco him by protest against his propos , but she dar not believ it , and could not help say so . `` but , depend upon it , mr. collin , '' she ad , `` that lizzy shal be brought to reason . i wil speak to her about it direct . she is a very headstrong , fool girl , and doe not know her own interest but i wil mak her know it . '' `` pardon me for interrupt you , madam , '' cri mr. collin ; `` but if she is real headstrong and fool , i know not wheth she would altogeth be a very desir wif to a man in my situ , who nat look for happy in the marry stat . if theref she act persist in reject my suit , perhap it wer bet not to forc her into acceiv me , becaus if liabl to such defect of temp , she could not contribut much to my fel . '' `` sir , you quit misunderstand me , '' said mrs. bennet , alarm . `` lizzy is on headstrong in such mat as thes . in everyth els she is as good-natur a girl as ev liv . i wil go direct to mr. bennet , and we shal very soon settl it with her , i am sur . '' she would not giv him tim to reply , but hurry inst to her husband , cal out as she ent the libr , `` oh ! mr. bennet , you ar want immedy ; we ar al in an upro . you must com and mak lizzy marry mr. collin , for she vow she wil not hav him , and if you do not mak hast he wil chang his mind and not hav her . '' mr. bennet rais his ey from his book as she ent , and fix them on her fac with a calm unconcern which was not in the least alt by her commun . `` i hav not the pleas of understand you , '' said he , when she had fin her speech . `` of what ar you talk ? '' `` of mr. collin and lizzy . lizzy decl she wil not hav mr. collin , and mr. collin begin to say that he wil not hav lizzy . '' `` and what am i to do on the occas ? it seem an hopeless busy . '' `` speak to lizzy about it yourself . tel her that you insist upon her marry him . '' `` let her be cal down . she shal hear my opin . '' mrs. bennet rang the bel , and miss elizabe was summon to the libr . `` com her , child , '' cri her fath as she appear . `` i hav sent for you on an affair of import . i understand that mr. collin has mad you an off of marry . is it tru ? '' elizabe reply that it was . `` very well—and thi off of marry you hav refus ? '' `` i hav , sir . '' `` very wel . we now com to the point . yo moth insist upon yo acceiv it . is it not so , mrs . bennet ? '' `` ye , or i wil nev see her again . '' `` an unhappy altern is bef you , elizabe . from thi day you must be a stranger to on of yo par . yo moth wil nev see you again if you do not marry mr. collin , and i wil nev see you again if you do . '' elizabe could not but smil at such a conclud of such a begin , but mrs. bennet , who had persuad herself that her husband regard the affair as she wish , was excess disappoint . `` what do you mean , mr. bennet , in talk thi way ? you prom me to insist upon her marry him . '' `` my dear , '' reply her husband , `` i hav two smal favo to request . first , that you wil allow me the fre us of my understand on the pres occas ; and second , of my room . i shal be glad to hav the libr to myself as soon as may be . '' not yet , howev , in spit of her disappoint in her husband , did mrs. bennet giv up the point . she talk to elizabe again and again ; coax and threatened her by turn . she endeavo to sec jan in her interest ; but jan , with al poss mild , declin interf ; and elizabe , sometim with real earnest , and sometim with play gai , reply to her attack . though her man vary , howev , her determin nev did . mr. collin , meanwhil , was medit in solitud on what had pass . he thought too wel of himself to comprehend on what mot his cousin could refus him ; and though his prid was hurt , he suff in no oth way . his regard for her was quit imagin ; and the poss of her deserv her moth 's reproach prev his feel any regret . whil the famy wer in thi confus , charlot luca cam to spend the day with them . she was met in the vestib by lyd , who , fly to her , cri in a half whisp , `` i am glad you ar com , for ther is such fun her ! what do you think has hap thi morn ? mr. collin has mad an off to lizzy , and she wil not hav him . '' charlot hard had tim to answ , bef they wer join by kitty , who cam to tel the sam new ; and no soon had they ent the breakfast-room , wher mrs. bennet was alon , than she likew beg on the subject , cal on miss luca for her compass , and ent her to persuad her friend lizzy to comply with the wish of al her famy . `` pray do , my dear miss luca , '' she ad in a melancho ton , `` for nobody is on my sid , nobody tak part with me . i am cruel us , nobody feel for my poor nerv . '' charlot 's reply was spar by the ent of jan and elizabe . `` ay , ther she com , '' continu mrs. bennet , `` look as unconcern as may be , and car no mor for us than if we wer at york , provid she can hav her own way . but i tel you , miss lizzy—if you tak it into yo head to go on refus every off of marry in thi way , you wil nev get a husband at all—and i am sur i do not know who is to maintain you when yo fath is dead . i shal not be abl to keep you—and so i warn you . i hav don with you from thi very day . i told you in the libr , you know , that i should nev speak to you again , and you wil find me as good as my word . i hav no pleas in talk to unduty childr . not that i hav much pleas , indee , in talk to anybody . peopl who suff as i do from nerv complaint can hav no gre inclin for talk . nobody can tel what i suff ! but it is alway so . thos who do not complain ar nev pity . '' her daught list in sil to thi effus , sens that any attempt to reason with her or sooth her would on increas the irrit . she talk on , theref , without interrupt from any of them , til they wer join by mr. collin , who ent the room with an air mor stat than us , and on perceiv whom , she said to the girl , `` now , i do insist upon it , that you , al of you , hold yo tongu , and let me and mr. collin hav a littl convers togeth . '' elizabe pass quiet out of the room , jan and kitty follow , but lyd stood her ground , determin to hear al she could ; and charlot , detain first by the civil of mr. collin , whos inquiry aft herself and al her famy wer very minut , and then by a littl curios , satisfy herself with walk to the window and pretend not to hear . in a dol voic mrs. bennet beg the project convers : `` oh ! mr . collin ! '' `` my dear madam , '' reply he , `` let us be for ev sil on thi point . far be it from me , '' he pres continu , in a voic that mark his displeas , `` to res the behavio of yo daught . resign to inevit evil is the duty of us al ; the peculi duty of a young man who has been so fortun as i hav been in ear pref ; and i trust i am resign . perhap not the less so from feel a doubt of my posit happy had my fair cousin hono me with her hand ; for i hav oft observ that resign is nev so perfect as when the bless deny begin to los somewh of it valu in our estim . you wil not , i hop , consid me as show any disrespect to yo famy , my dear madam , by thu withdraw my pretend to yo daught 's favo , without hav paid yourself and mr. bennet the comply of request you to interpos yo auth in my behalf . my conduc may , i fear , be object in hav acceiv my dismit from yo daught 's lip instead of yo own . but we ar al liabl to er . i hav certain meant wel through the whol affair . my object has been to sec an amy comp for myself , with due consid for the adv of al yo famy , and if my man has been at al reprehens , i her beg leav to apolog . '' chapt 21 the discuss of mr. collin 's off was now near at an end , and elizabe had on to suff from the uncomfort feel necess attend it , and occas from som peev allud of her moth . as for the gentlem himself , his feel wer chief express , not by embarrass or deject , or by try to avoid her , but by stiff of man and res sil . he scarc ev spok to her , and the assidu at which he had been so sens of himself wer transfer for the rest of the day to miss luca , whos civil in list to him was a season reliev to them al , and espec to her friend . the morrow produc no ab of mrs. bennet 's ill-humour or il heal . mr. collin was also in the sam stat of angry prid . elizabe had hop that his res might short his visit , but his plan did not appear in the least affect by it . he was alway to hav gon on saturday , and to saturday he meant to stay . aft breakfast , the girl walk to meryton to inquir if mr. wickham wer return , and to lam ov his abs from the netherfield bal . he join them on their ent the town , and attend them to their aunt 's wher his regret and vex , and the concern of everybody , was wel talk ov . to elizabe , howev , he volunt acknowledg that the necess of his abs had been self-imposed . `` i found , '' said he , `` as the tim drew near that i had bet not meet mr. darcy ; that to be in the sam room , the sam party with him for so many hour togeth , might be mor than i could bear , and that scen might ar unpleas to mor than myself . '' she high approv his forbear , and they had leis for a ful discuss of it , and for al the commend which they civil bestow on each oth , as wickham and anoth off walk back with them to longbourn , and dur the walk he particul attend to her . his accompany them was a doubl adv ; she felt al the comply it off to herself , and it was most acceiv as an occas of introduc him to her fath and moth . soon aft their return , a let was del to miss bennet ; it cam from netherfield . the envelop contain a sheet of eleg , littl , hot-pressed pap , wel cov with a lady 's fair , flow hand ; and elizabe saw her sist 's count chang as she read it , and saw her dwel int on som particul pass . jan recollect herself soon , and put the let away , tri to join with her us che in the gen convers ; but elizabe felt an anxy on the subject which drew off her at ev from wickham ; and no soon had he and his comp tak leav , than a glant from jan invit her to follow her up stair . when they had gain their own room , jan , tak out the let , said : '' thi is from carolin bingley ; what it contain has surpr me a good deal . the whol party hav left netherfield by thi tim , and ar on their way to town—and without any int of com back again . you shal hear what she say . '' she then read the first sent aloud , which compr the inform of their hav just resolv to follow their broth to town direct , and of their mean to din in grosv street , wher mr. hurst had a hous . the next was in thes word : `` i do not pretend to regret anyth i shal leav in hertfordshir , exceiv yo socy , my dearest friend ; but we wil hop , at som fut period , to enjoy many return of that delight intercours we hav known , and in the meanwhil may less the pain of sep by a very frequ and most unreserv correspond . i depend on you for that . '' to thes highflown express elizabe list with al the insens of distrust ; and though the sud of their remov surpr her , she saw noth in it real to lam ; it was not to be suppos that their abs from netherfield would prev mr. bingley 's being ther ; and as to the loss of their socy , she was persuad that jan must ceas to regard it , in the enjoy of his . `` it is unlucky , '' said she , aft a short paus , `` that you should not be abl to see yo friend bef they leav the country . but may we not hop that the period of fut happy to which miss bingley look forward may ar ear than she is aw , and that the delight intercours you hav known as friend wil be renew with yet gre satisfact as sist ? mr. bingley wil not be detain in london by them . '' `` carolin decid say that non of the party wil return into hertfordshir thi wint . i wil read it to you : '' '' when my broth left us yesterday , he imagin that the busy which took him to london might be conclud in three or four day ; but as we ar certain it can not be so , and at the sam tim convint that when charl get to town he wil be in no hurry to leav it again , we hav determin on follow him thith , that he may not be oblig to spend his vac hour in a comfortless hotel . many of my acquaint ar already ther for the wint ; i wish that i could hear that you , my dearest friend , had any int of mak on of the crowd—but of that i despair . i sint hop yo christmas in hertfordshir may abound in the gai which that season gen bring , and that yo beaux wil be so num as to prev yo feel the loss of the three of whom we shal depr you . '' `` it is evid by thi , '' ad jan , `` that he com back no mor thi wint . '' `` it is on evid that miss bingley doe not mean that he should . '' `` why wil you think so ? it must be his own doing . he is his own mast . but you do not know al . i wil read you the pass which particul hurt me . i wil hav no reserv from you . '' `` mr. darcy is impaty to see his sist ; and , to confess the tru , we ar scarc less eag to meet her again . i real do not think georgian darcy has her eq for beauty , eleg , and accompl ; and the affect she inspir in louis and myself is height into someth stil mor interest , from the hop we dar entertain of her being hereaft our sist . i do not know wheth i ev bef ment to you my feel on thi subject ; but i wil not leav the country without confid them , and i trust you wil not esteem them unreason . my broth admir her gre already ; he wil hav frequ opportun now of see her on the most intim foot ; her rel al wish the connect as much as his own ; and a sist 's part is not mislead me , i think , when i cal charl most cap of eng any wom 's heart . with al thes circumst to favo an attach , and noth to prev it , am i wrong , my dearest jan , in indulg the hop of an ev which wil sec the happy of so many ? '' `` what do you think of thi sent , my dear lizzy ? '' said jan as she fin it . `` is it not clear enough ? doe it not express decl that carolin neith expect nor wish me to be her sist ; that she is perfect convint of her broth 's indiff ; and that if she suspect the nat of my feel for him , she mean ( most kind ! ) to put me on my guard ? can ther be any oth opin on the subject ? '' `` ye , ther can ; for min is tot diff . wil you hear it ? '' `` most wil . '' `` you shal hav it in a few word . miss bingley see that her broth is in lov with you , and want him to marry miss darcy . she follow him to town in hop of keep him ther , and tri to persuad you that he doe not car about you . '' jan shook her head . `` indee , jan , you ought to believ me . no on who has ev seen you togeth can doubt his affect . miss bingley , i am sur , can not . she is not such a simpleton . could she hav seen half as much lov in mr. darcy for herself , she would hav ord her wed cloth . but the cas is thi : we ar not rich enough or grand enough for them ; and she is the mor anxy to get miss darcy for her broth , from the not that when ther has been on intermarry , she may hav less troubl in achiev a second ; in which ther is certain som ingenu , and i dar say it would success , if miss de bourgh wer out of the way . but , my dearest jan , you can not sery imagin that becaus miss bingley tel you her broth gre admir miss darcy , he is in the smallest degr less sens of yo merit than when he took leav of you on tuesday , or that it wil be in her pow to persuad him that , instead of being in lov with you , he is very much in lov with her friend . '' `` if we thought alik of miss bingley , '' reply jan , `` yo repres of al thi might mak me quit easy . but i know the found is unjust . carolin is incap of wil deceiv anyon ; and al that i can hop in thi cas is that she is deceiv herself . '' `` that is right . you could not hav start a mor happy ide , sint you wil not tak comfort in min . believ her to be deceiv , by al mean . you hav now don yo duty by her , and must fret no long . '' `` but , my dear sist , can i be happy , ev suppos the best , in acceiv a man whos sist and friend ar al wish him to marry elsewh ? '' `` you must decid for yourself , '' said elizabe ; `` and if , upon mat delib , you find that the misery of disoblig his two sist is mor than equ to the happy of being his wif , i adv you by al mean to refus him . '' `` how can you talk so ? '' said jan , faint smil . `` you must know that though i should be excess griev at their disapprob , i could not hesit . '' `` i did not think you would ; and that being the cas , i can not consid yo situ with much compass . '' `` but if he return no mor thi wint , my cho wil nev be requir . a thousand thing may ar in six month ! '' the ide of his return no mor elizabe tre with the utmost contempt . it appear to her mer the suggest of carolin 's interest wish , and she could not for a mom suppos that thos wish , howev op or art spok , could influ a young man so tot independ of everyon . she repres to her sist as forc as poss what she felt on the subject , and had soon the pleas of see it happy effect . jan 's temp was not despond , and she was grad led to hop , though the diffid of affect sometim overcam the hop , that bingley would return to netherfield and answ every wish of her heart . they agree that mrs. bennet should on hear of the depart of the famy , without being alarm on the scor of the gentlem 's conduc ; but ev thi part commun gav her a gre deal of concern , and she bewail it as excess unlucky that the lady should hap to go away just as they wer al get so intim togeth . aft lam it , howev , at som leng , she had the consol that mr. bingley would be soon down again and soon din at longbourn , and the conclud of al was the comfort decl , that though he had been invit on to a famy din , she would tak car to hav two ful cours . chapt 22 the bennet wer eng to din with the lucas and again dur the chief of the day was miss luca so kind as to list to mr. collin . elizabe took an opportun of thank her . `` it keep him in good humo , '' said she , `` and i am mor oblig to you than i can express . '' charlot ass her friend of her satisfact in being us , and that it amply repaid her for the littl sacr of her tim . thi was very amy , but charlot 's kind extend farth than elizabe had any conceiv of ; it object was noth els than to sec her from any return of mr. collin 's address , by eng them toward herself . such was miss luca 's scheme ; and appear wer so favo , that when they part at night , she would hav felt almost sec of success if he had not been to leav hertfordshir so very soon . but her she did injust to the fir and independ of his charact , for it led him to escap out of longbourn hous the next morn with admir sly , and hast to luca lodg to throw himself at her feet . he was anxy to avoid the not of his cousin , from a convict that if they saw him depart , they could not fail to conject his design , and he was not wil to hav the attempt known til it success might be known likew ; for though feel almost sec , and with reason , for charlot had been tol enco , he was comp diffid sint the adv of wednesday . his receiv , howev , was of the most flat kind . miss luca perceiv him from an up window as he walk toward the hous , and inst set out to meet him accid in the lan . but littl had she dar to hop that so much lov and eloqu await her ther . in as short a tim as mr. collin 's long speech would allow , everyth was settl between them to the satisfact of both ; and as they ent the hous he earnest ent her to nam the day that was to mak him the happiest of men ; and though such a solicit must be waiv for the pres , the lady felt no inclin to trifl with his happy . the stupid with which he was favo by nat must guard his court from any charm that could mak a wom wish for it continu ; and miss luca , who acceiv him sol from the pur and disinterest desir of an est , car not how soon that est wer gain . sir william and lady luca wer speedy apply to for their cons ; and it was bestow with a most joy alacr . mr. collin 's pres circumst mad it a most elig match for their daught , to whom they could giv littl fortun ; and his prospect of fut weal wer excess fair . lady luca beg direct to calc , with mor interest than the mat had ev excit bef , how many year long mr. bennet was lik to liv ; and sir william gav it as his decid opin , that whenev mr. collin should be in possess of the longbourn est , it would be high expedy that both he and his wif should mak their appear at st. jam 's . the whol famy , in short , wer prop overjoy on the occas . the young girl form hop of com out a year or two soon than they might otherw hav don ; and the boy wer reliev from their apprehend of charlot 's dying an old maid . charlot herself was tol compos . she had gain her point , and had tim to consid of it . her reflect wer in gen satisfact . mr. collin , to be sur , was neith sens nor agr ; his socy was irksom , and his attach to her must be imagin . but stil he would be her husband . without think high eith of men or matrimony , marry had alway been her object ; it was the on provid for well-educated young wom of smal fortun , and howev uncertain of giv happy , must be their pleasantest preserv from want . thi preserv she had now obtain ; and at the ag of twenty-seven , without hav ev been handsom , she felt al the good luck of it . the least agr circumst in the busy was the surpr it must occas to elizabe bennet , whos friend she valu beyond that of any oth person . elizabe would wond , and prob would blam her ; and though her resolv was not to be shak , her feel must be hurt by such a disapprob . she resolv to giv her the inform herself , and theref charg mr. collin , when he return to longbourn to din , to drop no hint of what had pass bef any of the famy . a prom of secrecy was of cours very duty giv , but it could not be kept without difficul ; for the curios excit by his long abs burst for in such very direct quest on his return as requir som ingenu to evad , and he was at the sam tim exerc gre self-denial , for he was long to publ his prosp lov . as he was to begin his journey too ear on the morrow to see any of the famy , the ceremony of leave-taking was perform when the lady mov for the night ; and mrs. bennet , with gre polit and cord , said how happy they should be to see him at longbourn again , whenev his eng might allow him to visit them . `` my dear madam , '' he reply , `` thi invit is particul grat , becaus it is what i hav been hop to receiv ; and you may be very certain that i shal avail myself of it as soon as poss . '' they wer al aston ; and mr. bennet , who could by no mean wish for so speedy a return , immedy said : '' but is ther not dang of lady catherin 's disapprob her , my good sir ? you had bet neglect yo rel than run the risk of offend yo patro . '' `` my dear sir , '' reply mr. collin , `` i am particul oblig to you for thi friend caut , and you may depend upon my not tak so mat a step without her lady 's concur . '' `` you can not be too much upon yo guard . risk anyth rath than her displeas ; and if you find it lik to be rais by yo com to us again , which i should think excess prob , stay quiet at hom , and be satisfy that we shal tak no off . '' `` believ me , my dear sir , my gratitud is warm excit by such affect at ; and depend upon it , you wil speedy receiv from me a let of thank for thi , and for every oth mark of yo regard dur my stay in hertfordshir . as for my fair cousin , though my abs may not be long enough to rend it necess , i shal now tak the liberty of wish them heal and happy , not exceiv my cousin elizabe . '' with prop civil the lady then withdrew ; al of them eq surpr that he medit a quick return . mrs. bennet wish to understand by it that he thought of pay his address to on of her young girl , and mary might hav been prevail on to acceiv him . she rat his abl much high than any of the oth ; ther was a solid in his reflect which oft struck her , and though by no mean so clev as herself , she thought that if enco to read and improv himself by such an exampl as her , he might becom a very agr comp . but on the follow morn , every hop of thi kind was don away . miss luca cal soon aft breakfast , and in a priv conf with elizabe rel the ev of the day bef . the poss of mr. collin 's fant himself in lov with her friend had ont occur to elizabe within the last day or two ; but that charlot could enco him seem almost as far from poss as she could enco him herself , and her aston was consequ so gre as to overcom at first the bound of decor , and she could not help cry out : '' eng to mr. collin ! my dear charlotte—impossibl ! '' the steady count which miss luca had command in tel her story , gav way to a mom confus her on receiv so direct a reproach ; though , as it was no mor than she expect , she soon regain her compos , and calm reply : '' why should you be surpr , my dear eliz ? do you think it incred that mr. collin should be abl to proc any wom 's good opin , becaus he was not so happy as to success with you ? '' but elizabe had now recollect herself , and mak a strong effort for it , was abl to ass with tol firm that the prospect of their rel was high grat to her , and that she wish her al imagin happy . `` i see what you ar feel , '' reply charlot . `` you must be surpr , very much surprised—so lat as mr. collin was wish to marry you . but when you hav had tim to think it ov , i hop you wil be satisfy with what i hav don . i am not rom , you know ; i nev was . i ask on a comfort hom ; and consid mr. collin 's charact , connect , and situ in lif , i am convint that my chant of happy with him is as fair as most peopl can boast on ent the marry stat . '' elizabe quiet answ `` undoubt ; '' and aft an awkward paus , they return to the rest of the famy . charlot did not stay much long , and elizabe was then left to reflect on what she had heard . it was a long tim bef she becam at al reconcil to the ide of so unsuit a match . the strangeness of mr. collin 's mak two off of marry within three day was noth in comparison of his being now acceiv . she had alway felt that charlot 's opin of matrimony was not exact lik her own , but she had not suppos it to be poss that , when cal into act , she would hav sacr every bet feel to world adv . charlot the wif of mr. collin was a most humy pict ! and to the pang of a friend disgrac herself and sunk in her esteem , was ad the distress convict that it was imposs for that friend to be tol happy in the lot she had chos . chapt 23 elizabe was sit with her moth and sist , reflect on what she had heard , and doubt wheth she was auth to ment it , when sir william luca himself appear , sent by his daught , to annount her eng to the famy . with many comply to them , and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connect between the hous , he unfold the matter—to an audy not mer wond , but incred ; for mrs. bennet , with mor persev than polit , protest he must be entir mistak ; and lyd , alway unguard and oft uncivil , boist exclaim : '' good lord ! sir william , how can you tel such a story ? do not you know that mr. collin want to marry lizzy ? '' noth less than the compla of a courty could hav born without ang such tre ; but sir william 's good bree carry him through it al ; and though he beg leav to be posit as to the tru of his inform , he list to al their impertin with the most forbear courtesy . elizabe , feel it incumb on her to reliev him from so unpleas a situ , now put herself forward to confirm his account , by ment her pri knowledg of it from charlot herself ; and endeavo to put a stop to the exclam of her moth and sist by the earnest of her congrat to sir william , in which she was ready join by jan , and by mak a vary of remark on the happy that might be expect from the match , the excel charact of mr. collin , and the conveny dist of hunsford from london . mrs. bennet was in fact too much overpow to say a gre deal whil sir william remain ; but no soon had he left them than her feel found a rapid vent . in the first plac , she persist in disbeliev the whol of the mat ; second , she was very sur that mr. collin had been tak in ; third , she trust that they would nev be happy togeth ; and fourth , that the match might be brok off . two inf , howev , wer plain deduc from the whol : on , that elizabe was the real caus of the mischief ; and the oth that she herself had been barb misus by them al ; and on thes two point she princip dwelt dur the rest of the day . noth could consol and noth could appeas her . nor did that day wear out her res . a week elaps bef she could see elizabe without scold her , a mon pass away bef she could speak to sir william or lady luca without being rud , and many month wer gon bef she could at al forg their daught . mr. bennet 's emot wer much mor tranquil on the occas , and such as he did expery he pronount to be of a most agr sort ; for it grat him , he said , to discov that charlot luca , whom he had been us to think tol sens , was as fool as his wif , and mor fool than his daught ! jan confess herself a littl surpr at the match ; but she said less of her aston than of her earnest desir for their happy ; nor could elizabe persuad her to consid it as improb . kitty and lyd wer far from envy miss luca , for mr. collin was on a clergym ; and it affect them in no oth way than as a piec of new to spread at meryton . lady luca could not be insens of triumph on being abl to retort on mrs. bennet the comfort of hav a daught wel marry ; and she cal at longbourn rath oft than us to say how happy she was , though mrs. bennet 's sour look and ill-natured remark might hav been enough to driv happy away . between elizabe and charlot ther was a restraint which kept them mut sil on the subject ; and elizabe felt persuad that no real confid could ev subsist between them again . her disappoint in charlot mad her turn with fond regard to her sist , of whos rectitud and del she was sur her opin could nev be shak , and for whos happy she grew dai mor anxy , as bingley had now been gon a week and noth mor was heard of his return . jan had sent carolin an ear answ to her let , and was count the day til she might reason hop to hear again . the prom let of thank from mr. collin ar on tuesday , address to their fath , and writ with al the solemn of gratitud which a twelvemon 's abod in the famy might hav prompt . aft discharg his conscy on that head , he process to inform them , with many rapt express , of his happy in hav obtain the affect of their amy neighbo , miss luca , and then explain that it was mer with the view of enjoy her socy that he had been so ready to clos with their kind wish of see him again at longbourn , whith he hop to be abl to return on monday fortnight ; for lady catherin , he ad , so hearty approv his marry , that she wish it to tak plac as soon as poss , which he trust would be an unansw argu with his amy charlot to nam an ear day for mak him the happiest of men . mr. collin 's return into hertfordshir was no long a mat of pleas to mrs. bennet . on the cont , she was as much dispos to complain of it as her husband . it was very strange that he should com to longbourn instead of to luca lodg ; it was also very inconveny and excess troublesom . she hat hav visit in the hous whil her heal was so indiff , and lov wer of al peopl the most disagr . such wer the gentl murm of mrs. bennet , and they gav way on to the gre distress of mr. bingley 's continu abs . neith jan nor elizabe wer comfort on thi subject . day aft day pass away without bring any oth tid of him than the report which short prevail in meryton of his com no mor to netherfield the whol wint ; a report which high incens mrs. bennet , and which she nev fail to contradict as a most scand fals . ev elizabe beg to fear—not that bingley was indifferent—but that his sist would be success in keep him away . unwil as she was to admit an ide so destruct of jan 's happy , and so dishon to the stabl of her lov , she could not prev it frequ occur . the unit effort of his two unfeel sist and of his overpow friend , assist by the attract of miss darcy and the amus of london might be too much , she fear , for the strength of his attach . as for jan , her anxy und thi suspens was , of cours , mor pain than elizabe 's , but whatev she felt she was desir of cont , and between herself and elizabe , theref , the subject was nev allud to . but as no such del restrain her moth , an hour seldom pass in which she did not talk of bingley , express her impaty for his ar , or ev requir jan to confess that if he did not com back she would think herself very il us . it nee al jan 's steady mild to bear thes attack with tol tranquil . mr. collin return most punct on monday fortnight , but his receiv at longbourn was not quit so gracy as it had been on his first introduc . he was too happy , howev , to nee much at ; and lucky for the oth , the busy of love-making reliev them from a gre deal of his company . the chief of every day was spent by him at luca lodg , and he sometim return to longbourn on in tim to mak an apolog for his abs bef the famy went to bed . mrs. bennet was real in a most pity stat . the very ment of anyth concern the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour , and wherev she went she was sur of hear it talk of . the sight of miss luca was ody to her . as her success in that hous , she regard her with jeal abhor . whenev charlot cam to see them , she conclud her to be anticip the hour of possess ; and whenev she spok in a low voic to mr. collin , was convint that they wer talk of the longbourn est , and resolv to turn herself and her daught out of the hous , as soon as mr. bennet wer dead . she complain bit of al thi to her husband . `` indee , mr. bennet , '' said she , `` it is very hard to think that charlot luca should ev be mistress of thi hous , that i should be forc to mak way for her , and liv to see her tak her plac in it ! '' `` my dear , do not giv way to such gloom thought . let us hop for bet thing . let us flat ourselv that i may be the surv . '' thi was not very consol to mrs. bennet , and theref , instead of mak any answ , she went on as bef . `` i can not bear to think that they should hav al thi est . if it was not for the entail , i should not mind it . '' `` what should not you mind ? '' `` i should not mind anyth at al . '' `` let us be thank that you ar preserv from a stat of such insens . '' `` i nev can be thank , mr. bennet , for anyth about the entail . how anyon could hav the conscy to entail away an est from on 's own daught , i can not understand ; and al for the sak of mr. collin too ! why should he hav it mor than anybody els ? '' `` i leav it to yourself to determin , '' said mr. bennet . chapt 24 miss bingley 's let ar , and put an end to doubt . the very first sent convey the ass of their being al settl in london for the wint , and conclud with her broth 's regret at not hav had tim to pay his respect to his friend in hertfordshir bef he left the country . hop was ov , entir ov ; and when jan could attend to the rest of the let , she found littl , exceiv the profess affect of the writ , that could giv her any comfort . miss darcy 's pra occupy the chief of it . her many attract wer again dwelt on , and carolin boast joy of their increas intim , and vent to predict the accompl of the wish which had been unfold in her form let . she wrot also with gre pleas of her broth 's being an inm of mr. darcy 's hous , and ment with rapt som plan of the lat with regard to new furnit . elizabe , to whom jan very soon commun the chief of al thi , heard it in sil indign . her heart was divid between concern for her sist , and res against al oth . to carolin 's assert of her broth 's being part to miss darcy she paid no credit . that he was real fond of jan , she doubt no mor than she had ev don ; and much as she had alway been dispos to lik him , she could not think without ang , hard without contempt , on that easy of temp , that want of prop resolv , which now mad him the slav of his design friend , and led him to sacr of his own happy to the capr of their inclin . had his own happy , howev , been the on sacr , he might hav been allow to sport with it in whatev man he thought best , but her sist 's was involv in it , as she thought he must be sens himself . it was a subject , in short , on which reflect would be long indulg , and must be unavail . she could think of noth els ; and yet wheth bingley 's regard had real died away , or wer suppress by his friend ' interf ; wheth he had been aw of jan 's attach , or wheth it had escap his observ ; whatev wer the cas , though her opin of him must be mat affect by the diff , her sist 's situ remain the sam , her peac eq wound . a day or two pass bef jan had cour to speak of her feel to elizabe ; but at last , on mrs. bennet 's leav them togeth , aft a long irrit than us about netherfield and it mast , she could not help say : '' oh , that my dear moth had mor command ov herself ! she can hav no ide of the pain she giv me by her contin reflect on him . but i wil not repin . it can not last long . he wil be forgot , and we shal al be as we wer bef . '' elizabe look at her sist with incred solicitud , but said noth . `` you doubt me , '' cri jan , slight colo ; `` indee , you hav no reason . he may liv in my mem as the most amy man of my acquaint , but that is al . i hav noth eith to hop or fear , and noth to reproach him with . thank god ! i hav not that pain . a littl tim , therefore—i shal certain try to get the bet . '' with a stronger voic she soon ad , `` i hav thi comfort immedy , that it has not been mor than an er of fant on my sid , and that it has don no harm to anyon but myself . '' `` my dear jan ! '' exclaim elizabe , `` you ar too good . yo sweet and disinterest ar real angel ; i do not know what to say to you . i feel as if i had nev don you just , or lov you as you deserv . '' miss bennet eag disclaim al extraordin merit , and threw back the pra on her sist 's warm affect . `` nay , '' said elizabe , `` thi is not fair . you wish to think al the world respect , and ar hurt if i speak il of anybody . i on want to think you perfect , and you set yourself against it . do not be afraid of my run into any excess , of my encroach on yo privileg of univers good-will . you nee not . ther ar few peopl whom i real lov , and stil few of whom i think wel . the mor i see of the world , the mor am i dissatisfy with it ; and every day confirm my believ of the inconsist of al hum charact , and of the littl depend that can be plac on the appear of merit or sens . i hav met with two inst lat , on i wil not ment ; the oth is charlot 's marry . it is unaccount ! in every view it is unaccount ! '' `` my dear lizzy , do not giv way to such feel as thes . they wil ruin yo happy . you do not mak allow enough for diff of situ and temp . consid mr. collin 's respect , and charlot 's steady , prud charact . rememb that she is on of a larg famy ; that as to fortun , it is a most elig match ; and be ready to believ , for everybody 's sak , that she may feel someth lik regard and esteem for our cousin . '' `` to oblig you , i would try to believ almost anyth , but no on els could be benefit by such a believ as thi ; for wer i persuad that charlot had any regard for him , i should on think wors of her understand than i now do of her heart . my dear jan , mr. collin is a conceit , pomp , narrow-minded , sil man ; you know he is , as wel as i do ; and you must feel , as wel as i do , that the wom who marry him can not hav a prop way of think . you shal not defend her , though it is charlot luca . you shal not , for the sak of on individ , chang the mean of principl and integr , nor endeavo to persuad yourself or me , that self is prud , and insens of dang sec for happy . '' `` i must think yo langu too strong in speak of both , '' reply jan ; `` and i hop you wil be convint of it by see them happy togeth . but enough of thi . you allud to someth els . you ment two inst . i can not misunderstand you , but i ent you , dear lizzy , not to pain me by think that person to blam , and say yo opin of him is sunk . we must not be so ready to fant ourselv int ind . we must not expect a liv young man to be alway so guard and circumspect . it is very oft noth but our own van that deceiv us . wom fant admir mean mor than it doe . '' `` and men tak car that they should . '' `` if it is design don , they can not be just ; but i hav no ide of ther being so much design in the world as som person imagin . '' `` i am far from attribut any part of mr. bingley 's conduc to design , '' said elizabe ; `` but without scheming to do wrong , or to mak oth unhappy , ther may be er , and ther may be misery . thoughtless , want of at to oth peopl 's feel , and want of resolv , wil do the busy . '' `` and do you imput it to eith of thos ? '' `` ye ; to the last . but if i go on , i shal displeas you by say what i think of person you esteem . stop me whilst you can . '' `` you persist , then , in suppos his sist influ him ? '' `` ye , in conjunct with his friend . '' `` i can not believ it . why should they try to influ him ? they can on wish his happy ; and if he is attach to me , no oth wom can sec it . '' `` yo first posit is fals . they may wish many thing besid his happy ; they may wish his increas of weal and consequ ; they may wish him to marry a girl who has al the import of money , gre connect , and prid . '' `` beyond a doubt , they do wish him to choos miss darcy , '' reply jan ; `` but thi may be from bet feel than you ar suppos . they hav known her much long than they hav known me ; no wond if they lov her bet . but , whatev may be their own wish , it is very unlik they should hav oppos their broth 's . what sist would think herself at liberty to do it , unless ther wer someth very object ? if they believ him attach to me , they would not try to part us ; if he wer so , they could not success . by suppos such an affect , you mak everybody act un and wrong , and me most unhappy . do not distress me by the ide . i am not asham of hav been mistaken—or , at least , it is light , it is noth in comparison of what i should feel in think il of him or his sist . let me tak it in the best light , in the light in which it may be understood . '' elizabe could not oppos such a wish ; and from thi tim mr. bingley 's nam was scarc ev ment between them . mrs. bennet stil continu to wond and repin at his return no mor , and though a day seldom pass in which elizabe did not account for it clear , ther was littl chant of her ev consid it with less perplex . her daught endeavo to convint her of what she did not believ herself , that his at to jan had been mer the effect of a common and transy lik , which ceas when he saw her no mor ; but though the prob of the stat was admit at the tim , she had the sam story to rep every day . mrs. bennet 's best comfort was that mr. bingley must be down again in the sum . mr. bennet tre the mat diff . `` so , lizzy , '' said he on day , `` yo sist is cross in lov , i find . i congrat her . next to being marry , a girl lik to be cross a littl in lov now and then . it is someth to think of , and it giv her a sort of distinct among her comp . when is yo turn to com ? you wil hard bear to be long outdon by jan . now is yo tim . her ar off enough in meryton to disappoint al the young lady in the country . let wickham be yo man . he is a pleas fellow , and would jilt you credit . '' `` thank you , sir , but a less agr man would satisfy me . we must not al expect jan 's good fortun . '' `` tru , '' said mr. bennet , `` but it is a comfort to think that whatev of that kind may befal you , you hav an affect moth who wil mak the most of it . '' mr. wickham 's socy was of mat serv in dispel the gloom which the lat pervers occur had thrown on many of the longbourn famy . they saw him oft , and to his oth recommend was now ad that of gen unreserv . the whol of what elizabe had already heard , his claim on mr. darcy , and al that he had suff from him , was now op acknowledg and publ canvass ; and everybody was pleas to know how much they had alway dislik mr. darcy bef they had known anyth of the mat . miss bennet was the on cre who could suppos ther might be any extenu circumst in the cas , unknown to the socy of hertfordshir ; her mild and steady cando alway plead for allow , and urg the poss of mistakes—but by everybody els mr. darcy was condemn as the worst of men . chapt 25 aft a week spent in profess of lov and schemes of fel , mr. collin was cal from his amy charlot by the ar of saturday . the pain of sep , howev , might be allevy on his sid , by prep for the receiv of his brid ; as he had reason to hop , that short aft his return into hertfordshir , the day would be fix that was to mak him the happiest of men . he took leav of his rel at longbourn with as much solemn as bef ; wish his fair cousin heal and happy again , and prom their fath anoth let of thank . on the follow monday , mrs. bennet had the pleas of receiv her broth and his wif , who cam as us to spend the christmas at longbourn . mr. gardin was a sens , gentlemanlik man , gre supery to his sist , as wel by nat as educ . the netherfield lady would hav had difficul in believ that a man who liv by trad , and within view of his own wareh , could hav been so well-bred and agr . mrs. gardin , who was sev year young than mrs. bennet and mrs. phillip , was an amy , intellig , eleg wom , and a gre favourit with al her longbourn niec . between the two eldest and herself espec , ther subsist a particul regard . they had frequ been stay with her in town . the first part of mrs. gardin 's busy on her ar was to distribut her pres and describ the newest fash . when thi was don she had a less act part to play . it becam her turn to list . mrs. bennet had many griev to rel , and much to complain of . they had al been very ill-used sint she last saw her sist . two of her girl had been upon the point of marry , and aft al ther was noth in it . `` i do not blam jan , '' she continu , `` for jan would hav got mr. bingley if she could . but lizzy ! oh , sist ! it is very hard to think that she might hav been mr. collin 's wif by thi tim , had it not been for her own pervers . he mad her an off in thi very room , and she refus him . the consequ of it is , that lady luca wil hav a daught marry bef i hav , and that the longbourn est is just as much entail as ev . the lucas ar very art peopl indee , sist . they ar al for what they can get . i am sorry to say it of them , but so it is . it mak me very nerv and poor , to be thwarted so in my own famy , and to hav neighbo who think of themselv bef anybody els . howev , yo com just at thi tim is the greatest of comfort , and i am very glad to hear what you tel us , of long sleev . '' mrs. gardin , to whom the chief of thi new had been giv bef , in the cours of jan and elizabe 's correspond with her , mad her sist a slight answ , and , in compass to her niec , turn the convers . when alon with elizabe afterward , she spok mor on the subject . `` it seem lik to hav been a desir match for jan , '' said she . `` i am sorry it went off . but thes thing hap so oft ! a young man , such as you describ mr. bingley , so easy fal in lov with a pretty girl for a few week , and when accid sep them , so easy forget her , that thes sort of inconsist ar very frequ . '' `` an excel consol in it way , '' said elizabe , `` but it wil not do for us . we do not suff by accid . it doe not oft hap that the interf of friend wil persuad a young man of independ fortun to think no mor of a girl whom he was viol in lov with on a few day bef . '' `` but that express of 'violently in lov ' is so hackney , so doubt , so indefinit , that it giv me very littl ide . it is as oft apply to feel which ar from a half-hour 's acquaint , as to a real , strong attach . pray , how viol was mr. bingley 's lov ? '' `` i nev saw a mor prom inclin ; he was grow quit inat to oth peopl , and whol engross by her . every tim they met , it was mor decid and remark . at his own bal he offend two or three young lady , by not ask them to dant ; and i spok to him twic myself , without receiv an answ . could ther be fin symptom ? is not gen incivil the very ess of lov ? '' `` oh , ye ! —of that kind of lov which i suppos him to hav felt . poor jan ! i am sorry for her , becaus , with her disposit , she may not get ov it immedy . it had bet hav hap to you , lizzy ; you would hav laugh yourself out of it soon . but do you think she would be prevail upon to go back with us ? chang of scen might be of service—and perhap a littl reliev from hom may be as us as anyth . '' elizabe was excess pleas with thi propos , and felt persuad of her sist 's ready acquiesc . `` i hop , '' ad mrs. gardin , `` that no consid with regard to thi young man wil influ her . we liv in so diff a part of town , al our connect ar so diff , and , as you wel know , we go out so littl , that it is very improb that they should meet at al , unless he real com to see her . '' `` and that is quit imposs ; for he is now in the custody of his friend , and mr. darcy would no mor suff him to cal on jan in such a part of london ! my dear aunt , how could you think of it ? mr. darcy may perhap hav heard of such a plac as gracechurch street , but he would hard think a mon 's ablut enough to cleans him from it imp , wer he ont to ent it ; and depend upon it , mr. bingley nev stir without him . '' `` so much the bet . i hop they wil not meet at al . but doe not jan correspond with his sist ? she wil not be abl to help cal . '' `` she wil drop the acquaint entir . '' but in spit of the certainty in which elizabe affect to plac thi point , as wel as the stil mor interest on of bingley 's being withheld from see jan , she felt a solicitud on the subject which convint her , on examin , that she did not consid it entir hopeless . it was poss , and sometim she thought it prob , that his affect might be reanim , and the influ of his friend success comb by the mor nat influ of jan 's attract . miss bennet acceiv her aunt 's invit with pleas ; and the bingley wer no otherw in her thought at the sam tim , than as she hop by carolin 's not liv in the sam hous with her broth , she might occas spend a morn with her , without any dang of see him . the gardin stay a week at longbourn ; and what with the phillips , the lucas , and the off , ther was not a day without it eng . mrs. bennet had so car provid for the entertain of her broth and sist , that they did not ont sit down to a famy din . when the eng was for hom , som of the off alway mad part of it—of which off mr. wickham was sur to be on ; and on thes occas , mrs. gardin , rend suspicy by elizabe 's warm commend , narrow observ them both . without suppos them , from what she saw , to be very sery in lov , their pref of each oth was plain enough to mak her a littl uneasy ; and she resolv to speak to elizabe on the subject bef she left hertfordshir , and repres to her the imprud of enco such an attach . to mrs. gardin , wickham had on mean of afford pleas , unconnect with his gen pow . about ten or a doz year ago , bef her marry , she had spent a consid tim in that very part of derbyshir to which he belong . they had , theref , many acquaint in common ; and though wickham had been littl ther sint the dea of darcy 's fath , it was yet in his pow to giv her fresh intellig of her form friend than she had been in the way of proc . mrs. gardin had seen pemberley , and known the lat mr. darcy by charact perfect wel . her consequ was an inexhaust subject of discours . in comp her recollect of pemberley with the minut describ which wickham could giv , and in bestow her tribut of pra on the charact of it lat possess , she was delight both him and herself . on being mad acquaint with the pres mr. darcy 's tre of him , she tri to rememb som of that gentlem 's reput disposit when quit a lad which might agr with it , and was confid at last that she recollect hav heard mr. fitzwilliam darcy form spok of as a very proud , ill-natured boy . chapt 26 mrs. gardin 's caut to elizabe was punct and kind giv on the first favo opportun of speak to her alon ; aft honest tel her what she thought , she thu went on : '' you ar too sens a girl , lizzy , to fal in lov mer becaus you ar warn against it ; and , theref , i am not afraid of speak op . sery , i would hav you be on yo guard . do not involv yourself or endeavo to involv him in an affect which the want of fortun would mak so very imprud . i hav noth to say against him ; he is a most interest young man ; and if he had the fortun he ought to hav , i should think you could not do bet . but as it is , you must not let yo fant run away with you . you hav sens , and we al expect you to us it . yo fath would depend on yo resolv and good conduc , i am sur . you must not disappoint yo fath . '' `` my dear aunt , thi is being sery indee . '' `` ye , and i hop to eng you to be sery likew . '' `` wel , then , you nee not be und any alarm . i wil tak car of myself , and of mr. wickham too . he shal not be in lov with me , if i can prev it . '' `` elizabe , you ar not sery now . '' `` i beg yo pardon , i wil try again . at pres i am not in lov with mr. wickham ; no , i certain am not . but he is , beyond al comparison , the most agr man i ev saw—and if he becom real attach to me—i believ it wil be bet that he should not . i see the imprud of it . oh ! that abomin mr. darcy ! my fath 's opin of me doe me the greatest hono , and i should be mis to forfeit it . my fath , howev , is part to mr. wickham . in short , my dear aunt , i should be very sorry to be the mean of mak any of you unhappy ; but sint we see every day that wher ther is affect , young peopl ar seldom withheld by immedy want of fortun from ent into eng with each oth , how can i prom to be wis than so many of my fellow-creatures if i am tempt , or how am i ev to know that it would be wisdom to resist ? al that i can prom you , theref , is not to be in a hurry . i wil not be in a hurry to believ myself his first object . when i am in company with him , i wil not be wish . in short , i wil do my best . '' `` perhap it wil be as wel if you disco his com her so very oft . at least , you should not remind yo moth of invit him . '' `` as i did the oth day , '' said elizabe with a conscy smil : `` very tru , it wil be wis in me to refrain from that . but do not imagin that he is alway her so oft . it is on yo account that he has been so frequ invit thi week . you know my moth 's idea as to the necess of const company for her friend . but real , and upon my hono , i wil try to do what i think to be the wisest ; and now i hop you ar satisfy . '' her aunt ass her that she was , and elizabe hav thank her for the kind of her hint , they part ; a wond inst of adv being giv on such a point , without being res . mr. collin return into hertfordshir soon aft it had been quit by the gardin and jan ; but as he took up his abod with the lucas , his ar was no gre inconveny to mrs. bennet . his marry was now fast approach , and she was at leng so far resign as to think it inevit , and ev rep to say , in an ill-natured ton , that she `` wish they might be happy . '' thursday was to be the wed day , and on wednesday miss luca paid her farewel visit ; and when she ros to tak leav , elizabe , asham of her moth 's ungr and reluct good wish , and sint affect herself , accompany her out of the room . as they went downstair togeth , charlot said : '' i shal depend on hear from you very oft , eliz . '' `` that you certain shal . '' `` and i hav anoth favo to ask you . wil you com and see me ? '' `` we shal oft meet , i hop , in hertfordshir . '' `` i am not lik to leav kent for som tim . prom me , theref , to com to hunsford . '' elizabe could not refus , though she foresaw littl pleas in the visit . `` my fath and mar ar com to me in march , '' ad charlot , `` and i hop you wil cons to be of the party . indee , eliz , you wil be as welcom as eith of them . '' the wed took plac ; the brid and bridegroom set off for kent from the church door , and everybody had as much to say , or to hear , on the subject as us . elizabe soon heard from her friend ; and their correspond was as regul and frequ as it had ev been ; that it should be eq unreserv was imposs . elizabe could nev address her without feel that al the comfort of intim was ov , and though determin not to slack as a correspond , it was for the sak of what had been , rath than what was . charlot 's first let wer receiv with a good deal of eag ; ther could not but be curios to know how she would speak of her new hom , how she would lik lady catherin , and how happy she would dar pronount herself to be ; though , when the let wer read , elizabe felt that charlot express herself on every point exact as she might hav foreseen . she wrot che , seem surround with comfort , and ment noth which she could not pra . the hous , furnit , neighbo , and road , wer al to her tast , and lady catherin 's behavio was most friend and oblig . it was mr. collin 's pict of hunsford and ros rat soft ; and elizabe perceiv that she must wait for her own visit ther to know the rest . jan had already writ a few lin to her sist to annount their saf ar in london ; and when she wrot again , elizabe hop it would be in her pow to say someth of the bingley . her impaty for thi second let was as wel reward as impaty gen is . jan had been a week in town without eith see or hear from carolin . she account for it , howev , by suppos that her last let to her friend from longbourn had by som accid been lost . `` my aunt , '' she continu , `` is going to-morrow into that part of the town , and i shal tak the opportun of cal in grosv street . '' she wrot again when the visit was paid , and she had seen miss bingley . `` i did not think carolin in spirit , '' wer her word , `` but she was very glad to see me , and reproach me for giv her no not of my com to london . i was right , theref , my last let had nev reach her . i inquir aft their broth , of cours . he was wel , but so much eng with mr. darcy that they scarc ev saw him . i found that miss darcy was expect to din . i wish i could see her . my visit was not long , as carolin and mrs. hurst wer going out . i dar say i shal see them soon her . '' elizabe shook her head ov thi let . it convint her that accid on could discov to mr. bingley her sist 's being in town . four week pass away , and jan saw noth of him . she endeavo to persuad herself that she did not regret it ; but she could no long be blind to miss bingley 's inat . aft wait at hom every morn for a fortnight , and inv every ev a fresh excus for her , the visit did at last appear ; but the short of her stay , and yet mor , the alt of her man would allow jan to deceiv herself no long . the let which she wrot on thi occas to her sist wil prov what she felt . `` my dearest lizzy wil , i am sur , be incap of triumph in her bet judg , at my expens , when i confess myself to hav been entir deceiv in miss bingley 's regard for me . but , my dear sist , though the ev has prov you right , do not think me obstin if i stil assert that , consid what her behavio was , my confid was as nat as yo susp . i do not at al comprehend her reason for wish to be intim with me ; but if the sam circumst wer to hap again , i am sur i should be deceiv again . carolin did not return my visit til yesterday ; and not a not , not a lin , did i receiv in the meantim . when she did com , it was very evid that she had no pleas in it ; she mad a slight , form apolog , for not cal bef , said not a word of wish to see me again , and was in every respect so alt a cre , that when she went away i was perfect resolv to continu the acquaint no long . i pity , though i can not help blam her . she was very wrong in singl me out as she did ; i can saf say that every adv to intim beg on her sid . but i pity her , becaus she must feel that she has been act wrong , and becaus i am very sur that anxy for her broth is the caus of it . i nee not explain myself farth ; and though we know thi anxy to be quit needless , yet if she feel it , it wil easy account for her behavio to me ; and so deserv dear as he is to his sist , whatev anxy she must feel on his behalf is nat and amy . i can not but wond , howev , at her hav any such fear now , becaus , if he had at al car about me , we must hav met , long ago . he know of my being in town , i am certain , from someth she said herself ; and yet it would seem , by her man of talk , as if she want to persuad herself that he is real part to miss darcy . i can not understand it . if i wer not afraid of judg harsh , i should be almost tempt to say that ther is a strong appear of dupl in al thi . but i wil endeavo to ban every pain thought , and think on of what wil mak me happy—your affect , and the invary kind of my dear unc and aunt . let me hear from you very soon . miss bingley said someth of his nev return to netherfield again , of giv up the hous , but not with any certainty . we had bet not ment it . i am extrem glad that you hav such pleas account from our friend at hunsford . pray go to see them , with sir william and mar . i am sur you wil be very comfort there.—yours , etc . '' thi let gav elizabe som pain ; but her spirit return as she consid that jan would no long be dup , by the sist at least . al expect from the broth was now absolv ov . she would not ev wish for a renew of his at . his charact sunk on every review of it ; and as a pun for him , as wel as a poss adv to jan , she sery hop he might real soon marry mr. darcy 's sist , as by wickham 's account , she would mak him abund regret what he had thrown away . mrs. gardin about thi tim remind elizabe of her prom concern that gentlem , and requir inform ; and elizabe had such to send as might rath giv cont to her aunt than to herself . his app part had subsid , his at wer ov , he was the admir of som on els . elizabe was watch enough to see it al , but she could see it and writ of it without mat pain . her heart had been but slight touch , and her van was satisfy with believ that she would hav been his on cho , had fortun permit it . the sud acquisit of ten thousand pound was the most remark charm of the young lady to whom he was now rend himself agr ; but elizabe , less clear-sighted perhap in thi cas than in charlot 's , did not quarrel with him for his wish of independ . noth , on the cont , could be mor nat ; and whil abl to suppos that it cost him a few struggles to relinqu her , she was ready to allow it a wis and desir meas for both , and could very sint wish him happy . al thi was acknowledg to mrs. gardin ; and aft rel the circumst , she thu went on : `` i am now convint , my dear aunt , that i hav nev been much in lov ; for had i real expery that pur and elev pass , i should at pres detest his very nam , and wish him al man of evil . but my feel ar not on cord toward him ; they ar ev impart toward miss king . i can not find out that i hat her at al , or that i am in the least unwil to think her a very good sort of girl . ther can be no lov in al thi . my watch has been effect ; and though i certain should be a mor interest object to al my acquaint wer i distract in lov with him , i can not say that i regret my comp insign . import may sometim be purchas too dear . kitty and lyd tak his defect much mor to heart than i do . they ar young in the way of the world , and not yet op to the mort convict that handsom young men must hav someth to liv on as wel as the plain . '' chapt 27 with no gre ev than thes in the longbourn famy , and otherw divers by littl beyond the walk to meryton , sometim dirty and sometim cold , did janu and febru pass away . march was to tak elizabe to hunsford . she had not at first thought very sery of going thith ; but charlot , she soon found , was depend on the plan and she grad learn to consid it herself with gre pleas as wel as gre certainty . abs had increas her desir of see charlot again , and weak her disgust of mr. collin . ther was novel in the scheme , and as , with such a moth and such uncomp sist , hom could not be faultless , a littl chang was not unwelcom for it own sak . the journey would moreov giv her a peep at jan ; and , in short , as the tim drew near , she would hav been very sorry for any delay . everyth , howev , went on smooth , and was fin settl accord to charlot 's first sketch . she was to accompany sir william and his second daught . the improv of spend a night in london was ad in tim , and the plan becam perfect as plan could be . the on pain was in leav her fath , who would certain miss her , and who , when it cam to the point , so littl lik her going , that he told her to writ to him , and almost prom to answ her let . the farewel between herself and mr. wickham was perfect friend ; on his sid ev mor . his pres pursuit could not mak him forget that elizabe had been the first to excit and to deserv his at , the first to list and to pity , the first to be admir ; and in his man of bid her adieu , wish her every enjoy , remind her of what she was to expect in lady catherin de bourgh , and trust their opin of her—their opin of everybody—would alway coincid , ther was a solicitud , an interest which she felt must ev attach her to him with a most sint regard ; and she part from him convint that , wheth marry or singl , he must alway be her model of the amy and pleas . her fellow-travellers the next day wer not of a kind to mak her think him less agr . sir william luca , and his daught mar , a good-humour girl , but as empty-headed as himself , had noth to say that could be wor hear , and wer list to with about as much delight as the rattl of the cha . elizabe lov absurd , but she had known sir william 's too long . he could tel her noth new of the wond of his pres and knight ; and his civil wer worn out , lik his inform . it was a journey of on twenty-four mil , and they beg it so ear as to be in gracechurch street by noon . as they drov to mr. gardin 's door , jan was at a drawing-room window watch their ar ; when they ent the pass she was ther to welcom them , and elizabe , look earnest in her fac , was pleas to see it health and lov as ev . on the stair wer a troop of littl boy and girl , whos eag for their cousin 's appear would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room , and whos shy , as they had not seen her for a twelvemon , prev their com low . al was joy and kind . the day pass most pleas away ; the morn in bustl and shop , and the ev at on of the the . elizabe then cont to sit by her aunt . their first object was her sist ; and she was mor griev than aston to hear , in reply to her minut inquiry , that though jan alway struggled to support her spirit , ther wer period of deject . it was reason , howev , to hop that they would not continu long . mrs. gardin gav her the particul also of miss bingley 's visit in gracechurch street , and rep convers occur at diff tim between jan and herself , which prov that the form had , from her heart , giv up the acquaint . mrs. gardin then ral her niec on wickham 's desert , and comply her on bear it so wel . `` but my dear elizabe , '' she ad , `` what sort of girl is miss king ? i should be sorry to think our friend merc . '' `` pray , my dear aunt , what is the diff in matrimon affair , between the merc and the prud mot ? wher doe discret end , and av begin ? last christmas you wer afraid of his marry me , becaus it would be imprud ; and now , becaus he is try to get a girl with on ten thousand pound , you want to find out that he is merc . '' `` if you wil on tel me what sort of girl miss king is , i shal know what to think . '' `` she is a very good kind of girl , i believ . i know no harm of her . '' `` but he paid her not the smallest at til her grandfath 's dea mad her mistress of thi fortun . '' `` no—why should he ? if it wer not allow for him to gain my affect becaus i had no money , what occas could ther be for mak lov to a girl whom he did not car about , and who was eq poor ? '' `` but ther seem an indel in direct his at toward her so soon aft thi ev . '' `` a man in distress circumst has not tim for al thos eleg decorum which oth peopl may observ . if she doe not object to it , why should we ? '' `` her not object doe not just him . it on show her being deficy in someth herself—sense or feel . '' `` wel , '' cri elizabe , `` hav it as you choos . he shal be merc , and she shal be fool . '' `` no , lizzy , that is what i do not choos . i should be sorry , you know , to think il of a young man who has liv so long in derbyshir . '' `` oh ! if that is al , i hav a very poor opin of young men who liv in derbyshir ; and their intim friend who liv in hertfordshir ar not much bet . i am sick of them al . thank heav ! i am going to-morrow wher i shal find a man who has not on agr qual , who has neith man nor sens to recommend him . stupid men ar the on on wor know , aft al . '' `` tak car , lizzy ; that speech savo strongly of disappoint . '' bef they wer sep by the conclud of the play , she had the unexpect happy of an invit to accompany her unc and aunt in a tour of pleas which they propos tak in the sum . `` we hav not determin how far it shal carry us , '' said mrs. gardin , `` but , perhap , to the lak . '' no scheme could hav been mor agr to elizabe , and her acceiv of the invit was most ready and grat . `` oh , my dear , dear aunt , '' she rapt cri , `` what delight ! what fel ! you giv me fresh lif and vigo . adieu to disappoint and spleen . what ar young men to rock and mountain ? oh ! what hour of transport we shal spend ! and when we do return , it shal not be lik oth travel , without being abl to giv on acc ide of anyth . we wil know wher we hav gone—w wil recollect what we hav seen . lak , mountain , and riv shal not be jumbl togeth in our imagin ; nor when we attempt to describ any particul scen , wil we begin quarrel about it rel situ . let our first effus be less insupport than thos of the gen of travel . '' chapt 28 every object in the next day 's journey was new and interest to elizabe ; and her spirit wer in a stat of enjoy ; for she had seen her sist look so wel as to ban al fear for her heal , and the prospect of her northern tour was a const sourc of delight . when they left the high road for the lan to hunsford , every ey was in search of the parson , and every turn expect to bring it in view . the pal of ros park was their bound on on sid . elizabe smil at the recollect of al that she had heard of it inhabit . at leng the parson was discern . the gard slop to the road , the hous stand in it , the green pal , and the laurel hedg , everyth decl they wer ar . mr. collin and charlot appear at the door , and the carry stop at the smal gat which led by a short gravel walk to the hous , amidst the nod and smil of the whol party . in a mom they wer al out of the cha , rejo at the sight of each oth . mrs. collin welcom her friend with the liveliest pleas , and elizabe was mor and mor satisfy with com when she found herself so affect receiv . she saw inst that her cousin 's man wer not alt by his marry ; his form civil was just what it had been , and he detain her som minut at the gat to hear and satisfy his inquiry aft al her famy . they wer then , with no oth delay than his point out the neat of the ent , tak into the hous ; and as soon as they wer in the parlo , he welcom them a second tim , with ostentaty form to his humbl abod , and punct rep al his wif 's off of refresh . elizabe was prep to see him in his glory ; and she could not help in fant that in display the good proport of the room , it aspect and it furnit , he address himself particul to her , as if wish to mak her feel what she had lost in refus him . but though everyth seem neat and comfort , she was not abl to grat him by any sigh of rep , and rath look with wond at her friend that she could hav so che an air with such a comp . when mr. collin said anyth of which his wif might reason be asham , which certain was not unseldom , she involunt turn her ey on charlot . ont or twic she could discern a faint blush ; but in gen charlot wis did not hear . aft sit long enough to admir every artic of furnit in the room , from the sideboard to the fend , to giv an account of their journey , and of al that had hap in london , mr. collin invit them to tak a stroll in the gard , which was larg and wel laid out , and to the cult of which he attend himself . to work in thi gard was on of his most respect pleas ; and elizabe admir the command of count with which charlot talk of the health of the exerc , and own she enco it as much as poss . her , lead the way through every walk and cross walk , and scarc allow them an interv to ut the pra he ask for , every view was point out with a minut which left beauty entir behind . he could numb the field in every direct , and could tel how many tre ther wer in the most dist clump . but of al the view which his gard , or which the country or kingdom could boast , non wer to be comp with the prospect of ros , afford by an op in the tre that bord the park near opposit the front of his hous . it was a handsom modern build , wel situ on ris ground . from his gard , mr. collin would hav led them round his two meadow ; but the lady , not hav sho to encount the remain of a whit frost , turn back ; and whil sir william accompany him , charlot took her sist and friend ov the hous , extrem wel pleas , prob , to hav the opportun of show it without her husband 's help . it was rath smal , but wel built and conveny ; and everyth was fit up and arrang with a neat and consist of which elizabe gav charlot al the credit . when mr. collin could be forgot , ther was real an air of gre comfort throughout , and by charlot 's evid enjoy of it , elizabe suppos he must be oft forgot . she had already learnt that lady catherin was stil in the country . it was spok of again whil they wer at din , when mr. collin join in , observ : '' ye , miss elizabe , you wil hav the hono of see lady catherin de bourgh on the ensu sunday at church , and i nee not say you wil be delight with her . she is al aff and condescend , and i doubt not but you wil be hono with som port of her not when serv is ov . i hav scarc any hesit in say she wil includ you and my sist mar in every invit with which she hono us dur yo stay her . her behavio to my dear charlot is charm . we din at ros twic every week , and ar nev allow to walk hom . her lady 's carry is regul ord for us . i should say , on of her lady 's carry , for she has sev . '' `` lady catherin is a very respect , sens wom indee , '' ad charlot , `` and a most at neighbo . '' `` very tru , my dear , that is exact what i say . she is the sort of wom whom on can not regard with too much def . '' the ev was spent chief in talk ov hertfordshir new , and tel again what had already been writ ; and when it clos , elizabe , in the solitud of her chamb , had to medit upon charlot 's degr of cont , to understand her address in guid , and compos in bear with , her husband , and to acknowledg that it was al don very wel . she had also to anticip how her visit would pass , the quiet ten of their us employ , the vexaty interrupt of mr. collin , and the gai of their intercours with ros . a liv imagin soon settl it al . about the middl of the next day , as she was in her room get ready for a walk , a sud nois below seem to speak the whol hous in confus ; and , aft list a mom , she heard somebody run up stair in a viol hurry , and cal loud aft her . she op the door and met mar in the land plac , who , breathless with agit , cri out— '' oh , my dear eliz ! pray mak hast and com into the dining-room , for ther is such a sight to be seen ! i wil not tel you what it is . mak hast , and com down thi mom . '' elizabe ask quest in vain ; mar would tel her noth mor , and down they ran into the dining-room , which front the lan , in quest of thi wond ; it was two lady stop in a low phaeton at the gard gat . `` and is thi al ? '' cri elizabe . `` i expect at least that the pig wer got into the gard , and her is noth but lady catherin and her daught . '' `` la ! my dear , '' said mar , quit shock at the mistak , `` it is not lady catherin . the old lady is mrs. jenkinson , who liv with them ; the oth is miss de bourgh . on look at her . she is quit a littl cre . who would hav thought that she could be so thin and smal ? '' `` she is abomin rud to keep charlot out of door in al thi wind . why doe she not com in ? '' `` oh , charlot say she hard ev doe . it is the greatest of favo when miss de bourgh com in . '' `` i lik her appear , '' said elizabe , struck with oth idea . `` she look sick and cross . ye , she wil do for him very wel . she wil mak him a very prop wif . '' mr. collin and charlot wer both stand at the gat in convers with the lady ; and sir william , to elizabe 's high divert , was stat in the doorway , in earnest contempl of the gre bef him , and const bow whenev miss de bourgh look that way . at leng ther was noth mor to be said ; the lady drov on , and the oth return into the hous . mr. collin no soon saw the two girl than he beg to congrat them on their good fortun , which charlot explain by let them know that the whol party was ask to din at ros the next day . chapt 29 mr. collin 's triumph , in consequ of thi invit , was complet . the pow of display the grand of his patro to his wond visit , and of let them see her civil toward himself and his wif , was exact what he had wish for ; and that an opportun of doing it should be giv so soon , was such an inst of lady catherin 's condescend , as he knew not how to admir enough . `` i confess , '' said he , `` that i should not hav been at al surpr by her lady 's ask us on sunday to drink tea and spend the ev at ros . i rath expect , from my knowledg of her aff , that it would hap . but who could hav foreseen such an at as thi ? who could hav imagin that we should receiv an invit to din ther ( an invit , moreov , includ the whol party ) so immedy aft yo ar ! '' `` i am the less surpr at what has hap , '' reply sir william , `` from that knowledg of what the man of the gre real ar , which my situ in lif has allow me to acquir . about the court , such inst of eleg bree ar not uncommon . '' scarc anyth was talk of the whol day or next morn but their visit to ros . mr. collin was car instruct them in what they wer to expect , that the sight of such room , so many serv , and so splendid a din , might not whol overpow them . when the lady wer sep for the toilet , he said to elizabeth— '' do not mak yourself uneasy , my dear cousin , about yo apparel . lady catherin is far from requir that eleg of dress in us which becom herself and her daught . i would adv you mer to put on whatev of yo cloth is supery to the rest—there is no occas for anyth mor . lady catherin wil not think the wors of you for being simply dress . she lik to hav the distinct of rank preserv . '' whil they wer dress , he cam two or three tim to their diff door , to recommend their being quick , as lady catherin very much object to be kept wait for her din . such formid account of her lady , and her man of liv , quit fright mar luca who had been littl us to company , and she look forward to her introduc at ros with as much apprehend as her fath had don to his pres at st. jam 's . as the weath was fin , they had a pleas walk of about half a mil across the park . every park has it beauty and it prospect ; and elizabe saw much to be pleas with , though she could not be in such rapt as mr. collin expect the scen to inspir , and was but slight affect by his enum of the window in front of the hous , and his rel of what the glaz altogeth had origin cost sir lew de bourgh . when they ascend the step to the hal , mar 's alarm was every mom increas , and ev sir william did not look perfect calm . elizabe 's cour did not fail her . she had heard noth of lady catherin that spok her aw from any extraordin tal or mirac virtu , and the mer stat of money or rank she thought she could wit without trepid . from the entrance-hall , of which mr. collin point out , with a rapt air , the fin proport and the fin orna , they follow the serv through an ante-chamber , to the room wher lady catherin , her daught , and mrs. jenkinson wer sit . her lady , with gre condescend , aros to receiv them ; and as mrs. collin had settl it with her husband that the off of introduc should be her , it was perform in a prop man , without any of thos apolog and thank which he would hav thought necess . in spit of hav been at st. jam 's sir william was so complet aw by the grand surround him , that he had but just cour enough to mak a very low bow , and tak his seat without say a word ; and his daught , fright almost out of her sens , sat on the edg of her chair , not know which way to look . elizabe found herself quit eq to the scen , and could observ the three lady bef her compos . lady catherin was a tal , larg wom , with strongly-marked feat , which might ont hav been handsom . her air was not cont , nor was her man of receiv them such as to mak her visit forget their infery rank . she was not rend formid by sil ; but whatev she said was spok in so authorit a ton , as mark her self-importance , and brought mr. wickham immedy to elizabe 's mind ; and from the observ of the day altogeth , she believ lady catherin to be exact what he repres . when , aft examin the moth , in whos count and deport she soon found som resembl of mr. darcy , she turn her ey on the daught , she could almost hav join in mar 's aston at her being so thin and so smal . ther was neith in fig nor fac any lik between the lady . miss de bourgh was pal and sick ; her feat , though not plain , wer insign ; and she spok very littl , exceiv in a low voic , to mrs. jenkinson , in whos appear ther was noth remark , and who was entir eng in list to what she said , and plac a screen in the prop direct bef her ey . aft sit a few minut , they wer al sent to on of the window to admir the view , mr. collin attend them to point out it beauty , and lady catherin kind inform them that it was much bet wor look at in the sum . the din was excess handsom , and ther wer al the serv and al the artic of plat which mr. collin had prom ; and , as he had likew foretold , he took his seat at the bottom of the tabl , by her lady 's desir , and look as if he felt that lif could furn noth gre . he carv , and at , and pra with delight alacr ; and every dish was commend , first by him and then by sir william , who was now enough recov to echo whatev his son-in-law said , in a man which elizabe wond lady catherin could bear . but lady catherin seem grat by their excess admir , and gav most gracy smil , espec when any dish on the tabl prov a novel to them . the party did not supply much convers . elizabe was ready to speak whenev ther was an op , but she was seat between charlot and miss de bourgh—the form of whom was eng in list to lady catherin , and the lat said not a word to her al dinner-time . mrs. jenkinson was chief employ in watch how littl miss de bourgh at , press her to try som oth dish , and fear she was indispos . mar thought speak out of the quest , and the gentlem did noth but eat and admir . when the lady return to the drawing-room , ther was littl to be don but to hear lady catherin talk , which she did without any intermit til coff cam in , del her opin on every subject in so decid a man , as prov that she was not us to hav her judg controvert . she inquir into charlot 's domest concern famili and minut , gav her a gre deal of adv as to the man of them al ; told her how everyth ought to be reg in so smal a famy as her , and instruct her as to the car of her cow and her poultry . elizabe found that noth was benea thi gre lady 's at , which could furn her with an occas of dict to oth . in the interv of her discours with mrs. collin , she address a vary of quest to mar and elizabe , but espec to the lat , of whos connect she knew the least , and who she observ to mrs. collin was a very genteel , pretty kind of girl . she ask her , at diff tim , how many sist she had , wheth they wer old or young than herself , wheth any of them wer lik to be marry , wheth they wer handsom , wher they had been educ , what carry her fath kept , and what had been her moth 's maid nam ? elizabe felt al the impertin of her quest but answ them very compos . lady catherin then observ , '' yo fath 's est is entail on mr. collin , i think . for yo sak , '' turn to charlot , `` i am glad of it ; but otherw i see no occas for entail est from the fem lin . it was not thought necess in sir lew de bourgh 's famy . do you play and sing , miss bennet ? '' `` a littl . '' `` oh ! then—some tim or oth we shal be happy to hear you . our instru is a capit on , prob supery to——you shal try it som day . do yo sist play and sing ? '' `` on of them doe . '' `` why did not you al learn ? you ought al to hav learn . the miss web al play , and their fath has not so good an incom as yo . do you draw ? '' `` no , not at al . '' `` what , non of you ? '' `` not on . '' `` that is very strange . but i suppos you had no opportun . yo moth should hav tak you to town every spring for the benefit of mast . '' `` my moth would hav had no object , but my fath hat london . '' `` has yo gov left you ? '' `` we nev had any gov . '' `` no gov ! how was that poss ? fiv daught brought up at hom without a gov ! i nev heard of such a thing . yo moth must hav been quit a slav to yo educ . '' elizabe could hard help smil as she ass her that had not been the cas . `` then , who taught you ? who attend to you ? without a gov , you must hav been neglect . '' `` comp with som famy , i believ we wer ; but such of us as wish to learn nev want the mean . we wer alway enco to read , and had al the mast that wer necess . thos who chos to be idl , certain might . '' `` ay , no doubt ; but that is what a gov wil prev , and if i had known yo moth , i should hav adv her most strenuously to eng on . i alway say that noth is to be don in educ without steady and regul instruct , and nobody but a gov can giv it . it is wond how many famy i hav been the mean of supply in that way . i am alway glad to get a young person wel plac out . four niec of mrs. jenkinson ar most delight situ through my mean ; and it was but the oth day that i recommend anoth young person , who was mer accid ment to me , and the famy ar quit delight with her . mrs. collin , did i tel you of lady metcalf 's cal yesterday to thank me ? she find miss pop a treas . 'lady catherin , ' said she , 'you hav giv me a treas . ' ar any of yo young sist out , miss bennet ? '' `` ye , ma'am , al . '' `` al ! what , al fiv out at ont ? very od ! and you on the second . the young on out bef the eld on ar marry ! yo young sist must be very young ? '' `` ye , my youngest is not sixteen . perhap she is ful young to be much in company . but real , ma'am , i think it would be very hard upon young sist , that they should not hav their shar of socy and amus , becaus the eld may not hav the mean or inclin to marry ear . the last-born has as good a right to the pleas of you as the first . and to be kept back on such a mot ! i think it would not be very lik to promot sist affect or del of mind . '' `` upon my word , '' said her lady , `` you giv yo opin very decid for so young a person . pray , what is yo ag ? '' `` with three young sist grown up , '' reply elizabe , smil , `` yo lady can hard expect me to own it . '' lady catherin seem quit aston at not receiv a direct answ ; and elizabe suspect herself to be the first cre who had ev dar to trifl with so much dign impertin . `` you can not be mor than twenty , i am sur , theref you nee not cont yo ag . '' `` i am not one-and-twenty . '' when the gentlem had join them , and tea was ov , the card-tables wer plac . lady catherin , sir william , and mr. and mrs. collin sat down to quadril ; and as miss de bourgh chos to play at cassino , the two girl had the hono of assist mrs. jenkinson to mak up her party . their tabl was superl stupid . scarc a syl was ut that did not rel to the gam , exceiv when mrs. jenkinson express her fear of miss de bourgh 's being too hot or too cold , or hav too much or too littl light . a gre deal mor pass at the oth tabl . lady catherin was gen speaking—stat the mistak of the three oth , or rel som anecdot of herself . mr. collin was employ in agr to everyth her lady said , thank her for every fish he won , and apolog if he thought he won too many . sir william did not say much . he was stor his mem with anecdot and nobl nam . when lady catherin and her daught had play as long as they chos , the tabl wer brok up , the carry was off to mrs. collin , grat acceiv and immedy ord . the party then gath round the fir to hear lady catherin determin what weath they wer to hav on the morrow . from thes instruct they wer summon by the ar of the coach ; and with many speech of thank on mr. collin 's sid and as many bow on sir william 's they depart . as soon as they had driv from the door , elizabe was cal on by her cousin to giv her opin of al that she had seen at ros , which , for charlot 's sak , she mad mor favo than it real was . but her commend , though cost her som troubl , could by no mean satisfy mr. collin , and he was very soon oblig to tak her lady 's pra into his own hand . chapt 30 sir william stay on a week at hunsford , but his visit was long enough to convint him of his daught 's being most comfort settl , and of her possess such a husband and such a neighbo as wer not oft met with . whil sir william was with them , mr. collin devot his morn to driv him out in his gig , and show him the country ; but when he went away , the whol famy return to their us employ , and elizabe was thank to find that they did not see mor of her cousin by the alt , for the chief of the tim between breakfast and din was now pass by him eith at work in the gard or in read and writ , and look out of the window in his own book-room , which front the road . the room in which the lady sat was backward . elizabe had at first rath wond that charlot should not pref the dining-parlour for common us ; it was a bet siz room , and had a mor pleas aspect ; but she soon saw that her friend had an excel reason for what she did , for mr. collin would undoubt hav been much less in his own apart , had they sat in on eq liv ; and she gav charlot credit for the arrang . from the drawing-room they could distinct noth in the lan , and wer indebt to mr. collin for the knowledg of what carry went along , and how oft espec miss de bourgh drov by in her phaeton , which he nev fail com to inform them of , though it hap almost every day . she not unfrequ stop at the parson , and had a few minut ' convers with charlot , but was scarc ev prevail upon to get out . very few day pass in which mr. collin did not walk to ros , and not many in which his wif did not think it necess to go likew ; and til elizabe recollect that ther might be oth famy liv to be dispos of , she could not understand the sacr of so many hour . now and then they wer hono with a cal from her lady , and noth escap her observ that was pass in the room dur thes visit . she examin into their employ , look at their work , and adv them to do it diff ; found fault with the arrang of the furnit ; or detect the housemaid in neglig ; and if she acceiv any refresh , seem to do it on for the sak of find out that mrs. collin 's joint of meat wer too larg for her famy . elizabe soon perceiv , that though thi gre lady was not in commit of the peac of the county , she was a most act mag in her own par , the minutest concern of which wer carry to her by mr. collin ; and whenev any of the cot wer dispos to be quarrelsom , discont , or too poor , she sal for into the vil to settl their diff , sil their complaint , and scold them into harmony and plenty . the entertain of din at ros was rep about twic a week ; and , allow for the loss of sir william , and ther being on on card-table in the ev , every such entertain was the counterpart of the first . their oth eng wer few , as the styl of liv in the neighbo in gen was beyond mr. collin 's reach . thi , howev , was no evil to elizabe , and upon the whol she spent her tim comfort enough ; ther wer half-hours of pleas convers with charlot , and the weath was so fin for the tim of year that she had oft gre enjoy out of door . her favourit walk , and wher she frequ went whil the oth wer cal on lady catherin , was along the op grov which edg that sid of the park , wher ther was a nic shelt path , which no on seem to valu but herself , and wher she felt beyond the reach of lady catherin 's curios . in thi quiet way , the first fortnight of her visit soon pass away . east was approach , and the week prec it was to bring an addit to the famy at ros , which in so smal a circ must be import . elizabe had heard soon aft her ar that mr. darcy was expect ther in the cours of a few week , and though ther wer not many of her acquaint whom she did not pref , his com would furn on comp new to look at in their ros party , and she might be amus in see how hopeless miss bingley 's design on him wer , by his behavio to his cousin , for whom he was evid destin by lady catherin , who talk of his com with the greatest satisfact , spok of him in term of the highest admir , and seem almost angry to find that he had already been frequ seen by miss luca and herself . his ar was soon known at the parson ; for mr. collin was walk the whol morn within view of the lodg op into hunsford lan , in ord to hav the earliest ass of it , and aft mak his bow as the carry turn into the park , hurry hom with the gre intellig . on the follow morn he hast to ros to pay his respect . ther wer two nephew of lady catherin to requir them , for mr. darcy had brought with him a colonel fitzwilliam , the young son of his unc lord —— , and , to the gre surpr of al the party , when mr. collin return , the gentlem accompany him . charlot had seen them from her husband 's room , cross the road , and immedy run into the oth , told the girl what an hono they might expect , ad : '' i may thank you , eliz , for thi piec of civil . mr. darcy would nev hav com so soon to wait upon me . '' elizabe had scarc tim to disclaim al right to the comply , bef their approach was annount by the door-bell , and short afterward the three gentlem ent the room . colonel fitzwilliam , who led the way , was about thirty , not handsom , but in person and address most tru the gentlem . mr. darcy look just as he had been us to look in hertfordshire—paid his comply , with his us reserv , to mrs. collin , and whatev might be his feel toward her friend , met her with every appear of compos . elizabe mer curtsey to him without say a word . colonel fitzwilliam ent into convers direct with the ready and eas of a well-bred man , and talk very pleas ; but his cousin , aft hav address a slight observ on the hous and gard to mrs. collin , sat for som tim without speak to anybody . at leng , howev , his civil was so far awak as to inquir of elizabe aft the heal of her famy . she answ him in the us way , and aft a mom 's paus , ad : '' my eldest sist has been in town thes three month . hav you nev hap to see her ther ? '' she was perfect sens that he nev had ; but she wish to see wheth he would betray any conscy of what had pass between the bingley and jan , and she thought he look a littl confus as he answ that he had nev been so fortun as to meet miss bennet . the subject was pursu no farth , and the gentlem soon afterward went away . chapt 31 colonel fitzwilliam 's man wer very much admir at the parson , and the lady al felt that he must ad consid to the pleas of their eng at ros . it was som day , howev , bef they receiv any invit thither—f whil ther wer visit in the hous , they could not be necess ; and it was not til easter-day , almost a week aft the gentlem 's ar , that they wer hono by such an at , and then they wer mer ask on leav church to com ther in the ev . for the last week they had seen very littl of lady catherin or her daught . colonel fitzwilliam had cal at the parson mor than ont dur the tim , but mr. darcy they had seen on at church . the invit was acceiv of cours , and at a prop hour they join the party in lady catherin 's drawing-room . her lady receiv them civil , but it was plain that their company was by no mean so acceiv as when she could get nobody els ; and she was , in fact , almost engross by her nephew , speak to them , espec to darcy , much mor than to any oth person in the room . colonel fitzwilliam seem real glad to see them ; anyth was a welcom reliev to him at ros ; and mrs. collin 's pretty friend had moreov caught his fant very much . he now seat himself by her , and talk so agr of kent and hertfordshir , of travel and stay at hom , of new book and mus , that elizabe had nev been half so wel entertain in that room bef ; and they convers with so much spirit and flow , as to draw the at of lady catherin herself , as wel as of mr. darcy . his ey had been soon and rep turn toward them with a look of curios ; and that her lady , aft a whil , shar the feel , was mor op acknowledg , for she did not scruple to cal out : '' what is that you ar say , fitzwilliam ? what is it you ar talk of ? what ar you tel miss bennet ? let me hear what it is . '' `` we ar speak of mus , madam , '' said he , when no long abl to avoid a reply . `` of mus ! then pray speak aloud . it is of al subject my delight . i must hav my shar in the convers if you ar speak of mus . ther ar few peopl in england , i suppos , who hav mor tru enjoy of mus than myself , or a bet nat tast . if i had ev learnt , i should hav been a gre proficy . and so would an , if her heal had allow her to apply . i am confid that she would hav perform delight . how doe georgian get on , darcy ? '' mr. darcy spok with affect pra of his sist 's proficy . `` i am very glad to hear such a good account of her , '' said lady catherin ; `` and pray tel her from me , that she can not expect to excel if she doe not pract a good deal . '' `` i ass you , madam , '' he reply , `` that she doe not nee such adv . she pract very const . '' `` so much the bet . it can not be don too much ; and when i next writ to her , i shal charg her not to neglect it on any account . i oft tel young lady that no excel in mus is to be acquir without const pract . i hav told miss bennet sev tim , that she wil nev play real wel unless she pract mor ; and though mrs. collin has no instru , she is very welcom , as i hav oft told her , to com to ros every day , and play on the pianofort in mrs. jenkinson 's room . she would be in nobody 's way , you know , in that part of the hous . '' mr. darcy look a littl asham of his aunt 's ill-breeding , and mad no answ . when coff was ov , colonel fitzwilliam remind elizabe of hav prom to play to him ; and she sat down direct to the instru . he drew a chair near her . lady catherin list to half a song , and then talk , as bef , to her oth nephew ; til the lat walk away from her , and mak with his us delib toward the pianofort stat himself so as to command a ful view of the fair perform 's count . elizabe saw what he was doing , and at the first conveny paus , turn to him with an arch smil , and said : '' you mean to fright me , mr. darcy , by com in al thi stat to hear me ? i wil not be alarm though yo sist doe play so wel . ther is a stubborn about me that nev can bear to be fright at the wil of oth . my cour alway ris at every attempt to intimid me . '' `` i shal not say you ar mistak , '' he reply , `` becaus you could not real believ me to entertain any design of alarm you ; and i hav had the pleas of yo acquaint long enough to know that you find gre enjoy in occas profess opin which in fact ar not yo own . '' elizabe laugh hearty at thi pict of herself , and said to colonel fitzwilliam , `` yo cousin wil giv you a very pretty not of me , and teach you not to believ a word i say . i am particul unlucky in meet with a person so abl to expos my real charact , in a part of the world wher i had hop to pass myself off with som degr of credit . indee , mr. darcy , it is very ung in you to ment al that you knew to my disadv in hertfordshire—and , giv me leav to say , very impolit too—for it is provok me to reta , and such thing may com out as wil shock yo rel to hear . '' `` i am not afraid of you , '' said he , smil . `` pray let me hear what you hav to accus him of , '' cri colonel fitzwilliam . `` i should lik to know how he behav among strangers . '' `` you shal hear then—but prep yourself for someth very dread . the first tim of my ev see him in hertfordshir , you must know , was at a ball—and at thi bal , what do you think he did ? he dant on four dant , though gentlem wer scarc ; and , to my certain knowledg , mor than on young lady was sit down in want of a partn . mr. darcy , you can not deny the fact . '' `` i had not at that tim the hono of know any lady in the assembl beyond my own party . '' `` tru ; and nobody can ev be introduc in a ball-room . wel , colonel fitzwilliam , what do i play next ? my fing wait yo ord . '' `` perhap , '' said darcy , `` i should hav judg bet , had i sought an introduc ; but i am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers . '' `` shal we ask yo cousin the reason of thi ? '' said elizabe , stil address colonel fitzwilliam . `` shal we ask him why a man of sens and educ , and who has liv in the world , is il qual to recommend himself to strangers ? '' `` i can answ yo quest , '' said fitzwilliam , `` without apply to him . it is becaus he wil not giv himself the troubl . '' `` i certain hav not the tal which som peopl possess , '' said darcy , `` of convers easy with thos i hav nev seen bef . i can not catch their ton of convers , or appear interest in their concern , as i oft see don . '' `` my fing , '' said elizabe , `` do not mov ov thi instru in the mast man which i see so many wom 's do . they hav not the sam forc or rapid , and do not produc the sam express . but then i hav alway suppos it to be my own fault—because i wil not tak the troubl of pract . it is not that i do not believ my fing as cap as any oth wom 's of supery execut . '' darcy smil and said , `` you ar perfect right . you hav employ yo tim much bet . no on admit to the privileg of hear you can think anyth want . we neith of us perform to strangers . '' her they wer interrupt by lady catherin , who cal out to know what they wer talk of . elizabe immedy beg play again . lady catherin approach , and , aft list for a few minut , said to darcy : '' miss bennet would not play at al amiss if she pract mor , and could hav the adv of a london mast . she has a very good not of fing , though her tast is not eq to an 's . an would hav been a delight perform , had her heal allow her to learn . '' elizabe look at darcy to see how cord he ass to his cousin 's pra ; but neith at that mom nor at any oth could she discern any symptom of lov ; and from the whol of his behavio to miss de bourgh she der thi comfort for miss bingley , that he might hav been just as lik to marry her , had she been his rel . lady catherin continu her remark on elizabe 's perform , mix with them many instruct on execut and tast . elizabe receiv them with al the forbear of civil , and , at the request of the gentlem , remain at the instru til her lady 's carry was ready to tak them al hom . chapt 32 elizabe was sit by herself the next morn , and writ to jan whil mrs. collin and mar wer gon on busy into the vil , when she was startl by a ring at the door , the certain sign of a visit . as she had heard no carry , she thought it not unlik to be lady catherin , and und that apprehend was put away her half-finished let that she might escap al impertin quest , when the door op , and , to her very gre surpr , mr. darcy , and mr. darcy on , ent the room . he seem aston too on find her alon , and apolog for his intrud by let her know that he had understood al the lady wer to be within . they then sat down , and when her inquiry aft ros wer mad , seem in dang of sink into tot sil . it was absolv necess , theref , to think of someth , and in thi emerg recollect when she had seen him last in hertfordshir , and feel cury to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty depart , she observ : '' how very sud you al quit netherfield last novemb , mr. darcy ! it must hav been a most agr surpr to mr. bingley to see you al aft him so soon ; for , if i recollect right , he went but the day bef . he and his sist wer wel , i hop , when you left london ? '' `` perfect so , i thank you . '' she found that she was to receiv no oth answ , and , aft a short paus ad : '' i think i hav understood that mr. bingley has not much ide of ev return to netherfield again ? '' `` i hav nev heard him say so ; but it is prob that he may spend very littl of his tim ther in the fut . he has many friend , and is at a tim of lif when friend and eng ar contin increas . '' `` if he mean to be but littl at netherfield , it would be bet for the neighbo that he should giv up the plac entir , for then we might poss get a settl famy ther . but , perhap , mr. bingley did not tak the hous so much for the conveny of the neighbo as for his own , and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the sam principl . '' `` i should not be surpr , '' said darcy , `` if he wer to giv it up as soon as any elig purchas off . '' elizabe mad no answ . she was afraid of talk long of his friend ; and , hav noth els to say , was now determin to leav the troubl of find a subject to him . he took the hint , and soon beg with , `` thi seem a very comfort hous . lady catherin , i believ , did a gre deal to it when mr. collin first cam to hunsford . '' `` i believ she did—and i am sur she could not hav bestow her kind on a mor grat object . '' `` mr. collin appear to be very fortun in his cho of a wif . '' `` ye , indee , his friend may wel rejo in his hav met with on of the very few sens wom who would hav acceiv him , or hav mad him happy if they had . my friend has an excel understanding—though i am not certain that i consid her marry mr. collin as the wisest thing she ev did . she seem perfect happy , howev , and in a prud light it is certain a very good match for her . '' `` it must be very agr for her to be settl within so easy a dist of her own famy and friend . '' `` an easy dist , do you cal it ? it is near fifty mil . '' `` and what is fifty mil of good road ? littl mor than half a day 's journey . ye , i cal it a very easy dist . '' `` i should nev hav consid the dist as on of the adv of the match , '' cri elizabe . `` i should nev hav said mrs. collin was settl near her famy . '' `` it is a proof of yo own attach to hertfordshir . anyth beyond the very neighbo of longbourn , i suppos , would appear far . '' as he spok ther was a sort of smil which elizabe fant she understood ; he must be suppos her to be think of jan and netherfield , and she blush as she answ : '' i do not mean to say that a wom may not be settl too near her famy . the far and the near must be rel , and depend on many vary circumst . wher ther is fortun to mak the expens of travel unimport , dist becom no evil . but that is not the cas her . mr. and mrs. collin hav a comfort incom , but not such a on as wil allow of frequ journeys—and i am persuad my friend would not cal herself near her famy und less than half the pres dist . '' mr. darcy drew his chair a littl toward her , and said , `` you can not hav a right to such very strong loc attach . you can not hav been alway at longbourn . '' elizabe look surpr . the gentlem expery som chang of feel ; he drew back his chair , took a newspap from the tabl , and glant ov it , said , in a cold voic : '' ar you pleas with kent ? '' a short dialog on the subject of the country ensu , on eith sid calm and concise—and soon put an end to by the ent of charlot and her sist , just return from her walk . the tete-a-tet surpr them . mr. darcy rel the mistak which had occas his intrud on miss bennet , and aft sit a few minut long without say much to anybody , went away . `` what can be the mean of thi ? '' said charlot , as soon as he was gon . `` my dear , eliz , he must be in lov with you , or he would nev hav cal us in thi famili way . '' but when elizabe told of his sil , it did not seem very lik , ev to charlot 's wish , to be the cas ; and aft vary conject , they could at last on suppos his visit to process from the difficul of find anyth to do , which was the mor prob from the tim of year . al field sport wer ov . within door ther was lady catherin , book , and a billiard-table , but gentlem can not alway be within door ; and in the near of the parson , or the pleas of the walk to it , or of the peopl who liv in it , the two cousin found a tempt from thi period of walk thith almost every day . they cal at vary tim of the morn , sometim sep , sometim togeth , and now and then accompany by their aunt . it was plain to them al that colonel fitzwilliam cam becaus he had pleas in their socy , a persuas which of cours recommend him stil mor ; and elizabe was remind by her own satisfact in being with him , as wel as by his evid admir of her , of her form favourit georg wickham ; and though , in comp them , she saw ther was less capt soft in colonel fitzwilliam 's man , she believ he might hav the best inform mind . but why mr. darcy cam so oft to the parson , it was mor difficult to understand . it could not be for socy , as he frequ sat ther ten minut togeth without op his lip ; and when he did speak , it seem the effect of necess rath than of choice—a sacr to propry , not a pleas to himself . he seldom appear real anim . mrs. collin knew not what to mak of him . colonel fitzwilliam 's occas laugh at his stupid , prov that he was gen diff , which her own knowledg of him could not hav told her ; and as she would lik to hav believ thi chang the effect of lov , and the object of that lov her friend eliz , she set herself sery to work to find it out . she watch him whenev they wer at ros , and whenev he cam to hunsford ; but without much success . he certain look at her friend a gre deal , but the express of that look was disput . it was an earnest , steadfast gaz , but she oft doubt wheth ther wer much admir in it , and sometim it seem noth but abs of mind . she had ont or twic suggest to elizabe the poss of his being part to her , but elizabe alway laugh at the ide ; and mrs. collin did not think it right to press the subject , from the dang of rais expect which might on end in disappoint ; for in her opin it admit not of a doubt , that al her friend 's dislik would van , if she could suppos him to be in her pow . in her kind schemes for elizabe , she sometim plan her marry colonel fitzwilliam . he was beyond comparison the most pleas man ; he certain admir her , and his situ in lif was most elig ; but , to counterb thes adv , mr. darcy had consid patron in the church , and his cousin could hav non at al . chapt 33 mor than ont did elizabe , in her rambl within the park , unexpect meet mr. darcy . she felt al the pervers of the misch that should bring him wher no on els was brought , and , to prev it ev hap again , took car to inform him at first that it was a favourit haunt of her . how it could occ a second tim , theref , was very od ! yet it did , and ev a third . it seem lik wil ill-nature , or a volunt pen , for on thes occas it was not mer a few form inquiry and an awkward paus and then away , but he act thought it necess to turn back and walk with her . he nev said a gre deal , nor did she giv herself the troubl of talk or of list much ; but it struck her in the cours of their third rencont that he was ask som od unconnect questions—about her pleas in being at hunsford , her lov of solit walk , and her opin of mr. and mrs. collin 's happy ; and that in speak of ros and her not perfect understand the hous , he seem to expect that whenev she cam into kent again she would be stay ther too . his word seem to imply it . could he hav colonel fitzwilliam in his thought ? she suppos , if he meant anyth , he must mean an allud to what might ar in that quart . it distress her a littl , and she was quit glad to find herself at the gat in the pal opposit the parson . she was eng on day as she walk , in perus jan 's last let , and dwel on som pass which prov that jan had not writ in spirit , when , instead of being again surpr by mr. darcy , she saw on look up that colonel fitzwilliam was meet her . put away the let immedy and forc a smil , she said : '' i did not know bef that you ev walk thi way . '' `` i hav been mak the tour of the park , '' he reply , `` as i gen do every year , and intend to clos it with a cal at the parson . ar you going much farth ? '' `` no , i should hav turn in a mom . '' and accord she did turn , and they walk toward the parson togeth . `` do you certain leav kent on saturday ? '' said she . `` yes—if darcy doe not put it off again . but i am at his dispos . he arrang the busy just as he pleas . '' `` and if not abl to pleas himself in the arrang , he has at least pleas in the gre pow of cho . i do not know anybody who seem mor to enjoy the pow of doing what he lik than mr . darcy . '' `` he lik to hav his own way very wel , '' reply colonel fitzwilliam . `` but so we al do . it is on that he has bet mean of hav it than many oth , becaus he is rich , and many oth ar poor . i speak feel . a young son , you know , must be in to self-denial and depend . '' `` in my opin , the young son of an earl can know very littl of eith . now sery , what hav you ev known of self-denial and depend ? when hav you been prev by want of money from going wherev you chos , or proc anyth you had a fant for ? '' `` thes ar hom questions—and perhap i can not say that i hav expery many hard of that nat . but in mat of gre weight , i may suff from want of money . young son can not marry wher they lik . '' `` unless wher they lik wom of fortun , which i think they very oft do . '' `` our habit of expens mak us too depend , and ther ar not many in my rank of lif who can afford to marry without som at to money . '' `` is thi , '' thought elizabe , `` meant for me ? '' and she colo at the ide ; but , recov herself , said in a liv ton , `` and pray , what is the us pric of an earl 's young son ? unless the eld broth is very sick , i suppos you would not ask abov fifty thousand pound . '' he answ her in the sam styl , and the subject drop . to interrupt a sil which might mak him fant her affect with what had pass , she soon afterward said : '' i imagin yo cousin brought you down with him chief for the sak of hav someon at his dispos . i wond he doe not marry , to sec a last conveny of that kind . but , perhap , his sist doe as wel for the pres , and , as she is und his sol car , he may do what he lik with her . '' `` no , '' said colonel fitzwilliam , `` that is an adv which he must divid with me . i am join with him in the guard of miss darcy . '' `` ar you indee ? and pray what sort of guard do you mak ? doe yo charg giv you much troubl ? young lady of her ag ar sometim a littl difficult to man , and if she has the tru darcy spirit , she may lik to hav her own way . '' as she spok she observ him look at her earnest ; and the man in which he immedy ask her why she suppos miss darcy lik to giv them any uneasy , convint her that she had somehow or oth got pretty near the tru . she direct reply : '' you nee not be fright . i nev heard any harm of her ; and i dar say she is on of the most tract cre in the world . she is a very gre favourit with som lady of my acquaint , mrs. hurst and miss bingley . i think i hav heard you say that you know them . '' `` i know them a littl . their broth is a pleas gentlemanlik man—he is a gre friend of darcy 's . '' `` oh ! ye , '' said elizabe dri ; `` mr. darcy is uncommon kind to mr. bingley , and tak a prodigy deal of car of him . '' `` car of him ! ye , i real believ darcy doe tak car of him in thos point wher he most want car . from someth that he told me in our journey hith , i hav reason to think bingley very much indebt to him . but i ought to beg his pardon , for i hav no right to suppos that bingley was the person meant . it was al conject . '' `` what is it you mean ? '' `` it is a circumst which darcy could not wish to be gen known , becaus if it wer to get round to the lady 's famy , it would be an unpleas thing . '' `` you may depend upon my not ment it . '' `` and rememb that i hav not much reason for suppos it to be bingley . what he told me was mer thi : that he congrat himself on hav lat sav a friend from the inconveny of a most imprud marry , but without ment nam or any oth particul , and i on suspect it to be bingley from believ him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort , and from know them to hav been togeth the whol of last sum . '' `` did mr. darcy giv you reason for thi interf ? '' `` i understood that ther wer som very strong object against the lady . '' `` and what art did he us to sep them ? '' `` he did not talk to me of his own art , '' said fitzwilliam , smil . `` he on told me what i hav now told you . '' elizabe mad no answ , and walk on , her heart swel with indign . aft watch her a littl , fitzwilliam ask her why she was so thought . `` i am think of what you hav been tel me , '' said she . `` yo cousin 's conduc doe not suit my feel . why was he to be the judg ? '' `` you ar rath dispos to cal his interf officy ? '' `` i do not see what right mr. darcy had to decid on the propry of his friend 's inclin , or why , upon his own judg alon , he was to determin and direct in what man his friend was to be happy . but , '' she continu , recollect herself , `` as we know non of the particul , it is not fair to condemn him . it is not to be suppos that ther was much affect in the cas . '' `` that is not an un surm , '' said fitzwilliam , `` but it is a less of the hono of my cousin 's triumph very sad . '' thi was spok jest ; but it appear to her so just a pict of mr. darcy , that she would not trust herself with an answ , and theref , abrupt chang the convers talk on indiff mat until they reach the parson . ther , shut into her own room , as soon as their visit left them , she could think without interrupt of al that she had heard . it was not to be suppos that any oth peopl could be meant than thos with whom she was connect . ther could not ex in the world two men ov whom mr. darcy could hav such boundless influ . that he had been concern in the meas tak to sep bingley and jan she had nev doubt ; but she had alway attribut to miss bingley the princip design and arrang of them . if his own van , howev , did not mislead him , he was the caus , his prid and capr wer the caus , of al that jan had suff , and stil continu to suff . he had ruin for a whil every hop of happy for the most affect , gen heart in the world ; and no on could say how last an evil he might hav inflict . `` ther wer som very strong object against the lady , '' wer colonel fitzwilliam 's word ; and thos strong object prob wer , her hav on unc who was a country attorney , and anoth who was in busy in london . `` to jan herself , '' she exclaim , `` ther could be no poss of object ; al lov and good as she is ! —her understand excel , her mind improv , and her man capt . neith could anyth be urg against my fath , who , though with som peculi , has abl mr. darcy himself nee not disdain , and respect which he wil prob nev reach . '' when she thought of her moth , her confid gav way a littl ; but she would not allow that any object ther had mat weight with mr. darcy , whos prid , she was convint , would receiv a deep wound from the want of import in his friend 's connect , than from their want of sens ; and she was quit decid , at last , that he had been part govern by thi worst kind of prid , and part by the wish of retain mr. bingley for his sist . the agit and tear which the subject occas , brought on a headach ; and it grew so much wors toward the ev , that , ad to her unwil to see mr. darcy , it determin her not to attend her cousin to ros , wher they wer eng to drink tea . mrs. collin , see that she was real unwel , did not press her to go and as much as poss prev her husband from press her ; but mr. collin could not cont his apprehend of lady catherin 's being rath displeas by her stay at hom . chapt 34 when they wer gon , elizabe , as if intend to exasp herself as much as poss against mr. darcy , chos for her employ the examin of al the let which jan had writ to her sint her being in kent . they contain no act complaint , nor was ther any rev of past occur , or any commun of pres suff . but in al , and in almost every lin of each , ther was a want of that che which had been us to charact her styl , and which , process from the ser of a mind at eas with itself and kind dispos toward everyon , had been scarc ev cloud . elizabe not every sent convey the ide of uneasy , with an at which it had hard receiv on the first perus . mr. darcy 's sham boast of what misery he had been abl to inflict , gav her a keen sens of her sist 's suff . it was som consol to think that his visit to ros was to end on the day aft the next—and , a stil gre , that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with jan again , and en to contribut to the recovery of her spirit , by al that affect could do . she could not think of darcy 's leav kent without rememb that his cousin was to go with him ; but colonel fitzwilliam had mad it clear that he had no int at al , and agr as he was , she did not mean to be unhappy about him . whil settl thi point , she was sud rous by the sound of the door-bell , and her spirit wer a littl flut by the ide of it being colonel fitzwilliam himself , who had ont bef cal lat in the ev , and might now com to inquir particul aft her . but thi ide was soon ban , and her spirit wer very diff affect , when , to her ut amaz , she saw mr. darcy walk into the room . in an hurry man he immedy beg an inquiry aft her heal , imput his visit to a wish of hear that she wer bet . she answ him with cold civil . he sat down for a few mom , and then get up , walk about the room . elizabe was surpr , but said not a word . aft a sil of sev minut , he cam toward her in an agit man , and thu beg : '' in vain i hav struggled . it wil not do . my feel wil not be repress . you must allow me to tel you how ard i admir and lov you . '' elizabe 's aston was beyond express . she star , colo , doubt , and was sil . thi he consid sufficy enco ; and the avow of al that he felt , and had long felt for her , immedy follow . he spok wel ; but ther wer feel besid thos of the heart to be detail ; and he was not mor eloqu on the subject of tend than of prid . his sens of her inferiority—of it being a degradation—of the famy obstac which had alway oppos to inclin , wer dwelt on with a warm which seem due to the consequ he was wound , but was very unlik to recommend his suit . in spit of her deeply-rooted dislik , she could not be insens to the comply of such a man 's affect , and though her int did not vary for an inst , she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receiv ; til , rous to res by his subsequ langu , she lost al compass in ang . she tri , howev , to compos herself to answ him with paty , when he should hav don . he conclud with repres to her the strength of that attach which , in spit of al his endeavo , he had found imposs to conqu ; and with express his hop that it would now be reward by her acceiv of his hand . as he said thi , she could easy see that he had no doubt of a favo answ . he spok of apprehend and anxy , but his count express real sec . such a circumst could on exasp farth , and , when he ceas , the colo ros into her cheek , and she said : '' in such cas as thi , it is , i believ , the est mod to express a sens of oblig for the senty avow , howev uneq they may be return . it is nat that oblig should be felt , and if i could feel gratitud , i would now thank you . but i can not —i hav nev desir yo good opin , and you hav certain bestow it most unwil . i am sorry to hav occas pain to anyon . it has been most unconscy don , howev , and i hop wil be of short dur . the feel which , you tel me , hav long prev the acknowledg of yo regard , can hav littl difficul in overcom it aft thi expl . '' mr. darcy , who was lean against the mantelpiec with his ey fix on her fac , seem to catch her word with no less res than surpr . his complect becam pal with ang , and the disturb of his mind was vis in every feat . he was struggling for the appear of compos , and would not op his lip til he believ himself to hav attain it . the paus was to elizabe 's feel dread . at leng , with a voic of forc calm , he said : '' and thi is al the reply which i am to hav the hono of expect ! i might , perhap , wish to be inform why , with so littl endeavo at civil , i am thu reject . but it is of smal import . '' `` i might as wel inquir , '' reply she , `` why with so evid a desir of offend and insult me , you chos to tel me that you lik me against yo wil , against yo reason , and ev against yo charact ? was not thi som excus for incivil , if i was uncivil ? but i hav oth provoc . you know i hav . had not my feel decid against you—had they been indiff , or had they ev been favo , do you think that any consid would tempt me to acceiv the man who has been the mean of ruin , perhap for ev , the happy of a most belov sist ? '' as she pronount thes word , mr. darcy chang colo ; but the emot was short , and he list without attempt to interrupt her whil she continu : '' i hav every reason in the world to think il of you . no mot can excus the unjust and ung part you act ther . you dar not , you can not deny , that you hav been the princip , if not the on mean of divid them from each other—of expos on to the cens of the world for capr and inst , and the oth to it derid for disappoint hop , and involv them both in misery of the acutest kind . '' she paus , and saw with no slight indign that he was list with an air which prov him whol unmov by any feel of remors . he ev look at her with a smil of affect incred . `` can you deny that you hav don it ? '' she rep . with assum tranquil he then reply : `` i hav no wish of deny that i did everyth in my pow to sep my friend from yo sist , or that i rejo in my success . toward him i hav been kind than toward myself . '' elizabe disdain the appear of not thi civil reflect , but it mean did not escap , nor was it lik to cont her . `` but it is not mer thi affair , '' she continu , `` on which my dislik is found . long bef it had tak plac my opin of you was decid . yo charact was unfold in the recit which i receiv many month ago from mr. wickham . on thi subject , what can you hav to say ? in what imagin act of friend can you her defend yourself ? or und what misrepres can you her impos upon oth ? '' `` you tak an eag interest in that gentlem 's concern , '' said darcy , in a less tranquil ton , and with a height colo . `` who that know what his misfortun hav been , can help feel an interest in him ? '' `` his misfortun ! '' rep darcy contemptu ; `` ye , his misfortun hav been gre indee . '' `` and of yo inflict , '' cri elizabe with energy . `` you hav reduc him to his pres stat of poverty—comparative poverty . you hav withheld the adv which you must know to hav been design for him . you hav depr the best year of his lif of that independ which was no less his due than his desert . you hav don al thi ! and yet you can tre the ment of his misfortun with contempt and ridic . '' `` and thi , '' cri darcy , as he walk with quick step across the room , `` is yo opin of me ! thi is the estim in which you hold me ! i thank you for explain it so ful . my fault , accord to thi calc , ar heavy indee ! but perhap , '' ad he , stop in his walk , and turn toward her , `` thes offens might hav been overlook , had not yo prid been hurt by my honest confess of the scruples that had long prev my form any sery design . thes bit accus might hav been suppress , had i , with gre policy , cont my struggles , and flat you into the believ of my being impel by unqual , unalloy inclin ; by reason , by reflect , by everyth . but disgu of every sort is my abhor . nor am i asham of the feel i rel . they wer nat and just . could you expect me to rejo in the infery of yo connect ? —to congrat myself on the hop of rel , whos condit in lif is so decid benea my own ? '' elizabe felt herself grow mor angry every mom ; yet she tri to the utmost to speak with compos when she said : '' you ar mistak , mr. darcy , if you suppos that the mod of yo decl affect me in any oth way , than as it spar me the concern which i might hav felt in refus you , had you behav in a mor gentlemanlik man . '' she saw him start at thi , but he said noth , and she continu : '' you could not hav mad the off of yo hand in any poss way that would hav tempt me to acceiv it . '' again his aston was obvy ; and he look at her with an express of mingl incred and mort . she went on : '' from the very beginning—from the first mom , i may almost say—of my acquaint with you , yo man , impress me with the fullest believ of yo arrog , yo conceit , and yo self disdain of the feel of oth , wer such as to form the groundwork of disapprob on which success ev hav built so immov a dislik ; and i had not known you a mon bef i felt that you wer the last man in the world whom i could ev be prevail on to marry . '' `` you hav said quit enough , madam . i perfect comprehend yo feel , and hav now on to be asham of what my own hav been . forg me for hav tak up so much of yo tim , and acceiv my best wish for yo heal and happy . '' and with thes word he hasty left the room , and elizabe heard him the next mom op the front door and quit the hous . the tumult of her mind , was now pain gre . she knew not how to support herself , and from act weak sat down and cri for half-an-hour . her aston , as she reflect on what had pass , was increas by every review of it . that she should receiv an off of marry from mr. darcy ! that he should hav been in lov with her for so many month ! so much in lov as to wish to marry her in spit of al the object which had mad him prev his friend 's marry her sist , and which must appear at least with eq forc in his own case—was almost incred ! it was grat to hav inspir unconscy so strong an affect . but his prid , his abomin pride—his shameless avow of what he had don with respect to jane—his unpardon ass in acknowledg , though he could not just it , and the unfeel man in which he had ment mr. wickham , his cruel toward whom he had not attempt to deny , soon overcam the pity which the consid of his attach had for a mom excit . she continu in very agit reflect til the sound of lady catherin 's carry mad her feel how uneq she was to encount charlot 's observ , and hurry her away to her room . chapt 35 elizabe awok the next morn to the sam thought and medit which had at leng clos her ey . she could not yet recov from the surpr of what had hap ; it was imposs to think of anyth els ; and , tot indispos for employ , she resolv , soon aft breakfast , to indulg herself in air and exerc . she was process direct to her favourit walk , when the recollect of mr. darcy 's sometim com ther stop her , and instead of ent the park , she turn up the lan , which led farth from the turnpike-road . the park pal was stil the bound on on sid , and she soon pass on of the gat into the ground . aft walk two or three tim along that part of the lan , she was tempt , by the pleas of the morn , to stop at the gat and look into the park . the fiv week which she had now pass in kent had mad a gre diff in the country , and every day was ad to the verd of the ear tre . she was on the point of continu her walk , when she caught a glimps of a gentlem within the sort of grov which edg the park ; he was mov that way ; and , fear of it being mr. darcy , she was direct ret . but the person who adv was now near enough to see her , and step forward with eag , pronount her nam . she had turn away ; but on hear herself cal , though in a voic which prov it to be mr. darcy , she mov again toward the gat . he had by that tim reach it also , and , hold out a let , which she instinct took , said , with a look of haughty compos , `` i hav been walk in the grov som tim in the hop of meet you . wil you do me the hono of read that let ? '' and then , with a slight bow , turn again into the plant , and was soon out of sight . with no expect of pleas , but with the strongest curios , elizabe op the let , and , to her stil increas wond , perceiv an envelop contain two sheet of letter-pap , writ quit through , in a very clos hand . the envelop itself was likew ful . pursu her way along the lan , she then beg it . it was dat from ros , at eight o'clock in the morn , and was as follow : — '' be not alarm , madam , on receiv thi let , by the apprehend of it contain any repetit of thos senty or renew of thos off which wer last night so disgust to you . i writ without any int of pain you , or humbl myself , by dwel on wish which , for the happy of both , can not be too soon forgot ; and the effort which the form and the perus of thi let must occas , should hav been spar , had not my charact requir it to be writ and read . you must , theref , pardon the freedom with which i demand yo at ; yo feel , i know , wil bestow it unwil , but i demand it of yo just . `` two offens of a very diff nat , and by no mean of eq magnitud , you last night laid to my charg . the first ment was , that , regardless of the senty of eith , i had detach mr. bingley from yo sist , and the oth , that i had , in defy of vary claim , in defy of hono and hum , ruin the immedy prosp and blast the prospect of mr. wickham . wil and wanton to hav thrown off the comp of my you , the acknowledg favourit of my fath , a young man who had scarc any oth depend than on our patron , and who had been brought up to expect it exert , would be a deprav , to which the sep of two young person , whos affect could be the grow of on a few week , could bear no comparison . but from the sev of that blam which was last night so lib bestow , respect each circumst , i shal hop to be in the fut sec , when the follow account of my act and their mot has been read . if , in the expl of them , which is due to myself , i am und the necess of rel feel which may be offend to yo , i can on say that i am sorry . the necess must be obey , and furth apolog would be absurd . `` i had not been long in hertfordshir , bef i saw , in common with oth , that bingley prefer yo eld sist to any oth young wom in the country . but it was not til the ev of the dant at netherfield that i had any apprehend of his feel a sery attach . i had oft seen him in lov bef . at that bal , whil i had the hono of dant with you , i was first mad acquaint , by sir william luca 's accid inform , that bingley 's at to yo sist had giv ris to a gen expect of their marry . he spok of it as a certain ev , of which the tim alon could be undecid . from that mom i observ my friend 's behavio at ; and i could then perceiv that his part for miss bennet was beyond what i had ev wit in him . yo sist i also watch . her look and man wer op , che , and eng as ev , but without any symptom of peculi regard , and i remain convint from the ev 's scrutiny , that though she receiv his at with pleas , she did not invit them by any particip of senty . if you hav not been mistak her , i must hav been in er . yo supery knowledg of yo sist must mak the lat prob . if it be so , if i hav been misl by such er to inflict pain on her , yo res has not been unreason . but i shal not scruple to assert , that the ser of yo sist 's count and air was such as might hav giv the most acut observ a convict that , howev amy her temp , her heart was not lik to be easy touch . that i was desir of believ her indiff is certain—but i wil vent to say that my investig and decid ar not us influ by my hop or fear . i did not believ her to be indiff becaus i wish it ; i believ it on impart convict , as tru as i wish it in reason . my object to the marry wer not mer thos which i last night acknowledg to hav the utmost forc of pass to put asid , in my own cas ; the want of connect could not be so gre an evil to my friend as to me . but ther wer oth caus of repugn ; caus which , though stil ex , and ex to an eq degr in both inst , i had myself endeavo to forget , becaus they wer not immedy bef me . thes caus must be stat , though brief . the situ of yo moth 's famy , though object , was noth in comparison to that tot want of propry so frequ , so almost uniform betray by herself , by yo three young sist , and occas ev by yo fath . pardon me . it pain me to offend you . but amidst yo concern for the defect of yo nearest rel , and yo displeas at thi repres of them , let it giv you consol to consid that , to hav conduc yourselv so as to avoid any shar of the lik cens , is pra no less gen bestow on you and yo eld sist , than it is hono to the sens and disposit of both . i wil on say farth that from what pass that ev , my opin of al party was confirm , and every induc height which could hav led me bef , to preserv my friend from what i esteem a most unhappy connect . he left netherfield for london , on the day follow , as you , i am certain , rememb , with the design of soon return . `` the part which i act is now to be explain . his sist ' uneasy had been eq excit with my own ; our coincid of feel was soon discov , and , alik sens that no tim was to be lost in detach their broth , we short resolv on join him direct in london . we accord went—and ther i ready eng in the off of point out to my friend the certain evil of such a cho . i describ , and enforc them earnest . but , howev thi remonst might hav stag or delay his determin , i do not suppos that it would ultim hav prev the marry , had it not been second by the ass that i hesit not in giv , of yo sist 's indiff . he had bef believ her to return his affect with sint , if not with eq regard . but bingley has gre nat modesty , with a stronger depend on my judg than on his own . to convint him , theref , that he had deceiv himself , was no very difficult point . to persuad him against return into hertfordshir , when that convict had been giv , was scarc the work of a mom . i can not blam myself for hav don thu much . ther is but on part of my conduc in the whol affair on which i do not reflect with satisfact ; it is that i condescend to adopt the meas of art so far as to cont from him yo sist 's being in town . i knew it myself , as it was known to miss bingley ; but her broth is ev yet ign of it . that they might hav met without il consequ is perhap prob ; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinct for him to see her without som dang . perhap thi cont , thi disgu was benea me ; it is don , howev , and it was don for the best . on thi subject i hav noth mor to say , no oth apolog to off . if i hav wound yo sist 's feel , it was unknow don and though the mot which govern me may to you very nat appear insufficy , i hav not yet learnt to condemn them . `` with respect to that oth , mor weighty accus , of hav ind mr. wickham , i can on refut it by lay bef you the whol of his connect with my famy . of what he has particul accus me i am ign ; but of the tru of what i shal rel , i can summon mor than on wit of undoubt verac . `` mr. wickham is the son of a very respect man , who had for many year the man of al the pemberley est , and whos good conduc in the discharg of his trust nat inclin my fath to be of serv to him ; and on georg wickham , who was his godson , his kind was theref lib bestow . my fath support him at school , and afterward at cambridge—most import assist , as his own fath , alway poor from the extrav of his wif , would hav been un to giv him a gentlem 's educ . my fath was not on fond of thi young man 's socy , whos man wer alway eng ; he had also the highest opin of him , and hop the church would be his profess , intend to provid for him in it . as for myself , it is many , many year sint i first beg to think of him in a very diff man . the vicy propensities—the want of principl , which he was car to guard from the knowledg of his best friend , could not escap the observ of a young man of near the sam ag with himself , and who had opportun of see him in unguard mom , which mr. darcy could not hav . her again i shal giv you pain—to what degr you on can tel . but whatev may be the senty which mr. wickham has cre , a susp of their nat shal not prev me from unfold his real character—it ad ev anoth mot . `` my excel fath died about fiv year ago ; and his attach to mr. wickham was to the last so steady , that in his wil he particul recommend it to me , to promot his adv in the best man that his profess might allow—and if he took ord , desir that a valu famy liv might be his as soon as it becam vac . ther was also a leg of on thousand pound . his own fath did not long surv min , and within half a year from thes ev , mr. wickham wrot to inform me that , hav fin resolv against tak ord , he hop i should not think it unreason for him to expect som mor immedy pecuny adv , in lieu of the pref , by which he could not be benefit . he had som int , he ad , of study law , and i must be aw that the interest of on thousand pound would be a very insufficy support therein . i rath wish , than believ him to be sint ; but , at any rat , was perfect ready to acc to his propos . i knew that mr. wickham ought not to be a clergym ; the busy was theref soon settled—he resign al claim to assist in the church , wer it poss that he could ev be in a situ to receiv it , and acceiv in return three thousand pound . al connect between us seem now dissolv . i thought too il of him to invit him to pemberley , or admit his socy in town . in town i believ he chief liv , but his study the law was a mer pret , and being now fre from al restraint , his lif was a lif of idl and dissip . for about three year i heard littl of him ; but on the deceas of the incumb of the liv which had been design for him , he apply to me again by let for the pres . his circumst , he ass me , and i had no difficul in believ it , wer excess bad . he had found the law a most unprofit study , and was now absolv resolv on being ordain , if i would pres him to the liv in question—of which he trust ther could be littl doubt , as he was wel ass that i had no oth person to provid for , and i could not hav forgot my rev fath 's int . you wil hard blam me for refus to comply with thi entreaty , or for resist every repetit to it . his res was in proport to the distress of his circumstances—and he was doubtless as viol in his abus of me to oth as in his reproach to myself . aft thi period every appear of acquaint was drop . how he liv i know not . but last sum he was again most pain obtrud on my not . `` i must now ment a circumst which i would wish to forget myself , and which no oblig less than the pres should induc me to unfold to any hum being . hav said thu much , i feel no doubt of yo secrecy . my sist , who is mor than ten year my juny , was left to the guard of my moth 's nephew , colonel fitzwilliam , and myself . about a year ago , she was tak from school , and an est form for her in london ; and last sum she went with the lady who presid ov it , to ramsg ; and thith also went mr. wickham , undoubt by design ; for ther prov to hav been a pri acquaint between him and mrs. young , in whos charact we wer most unhappy deceiv ; and by her con and aid , he so far recommend himself to georgian , whos affect heart retain a strong impress of his kind to her as a child , that she was persuad to believ herself in lov , and to cons to an elop . she was then but fifteen , which must be her excus ; and aft stat her imprud , i am happy to ad , that i ow the knowledg of it to herself . i join them unexpect a day or two bef the intend elop , and then georgian , un to support the ide of griev and offend a broth whom she almost look up to as a fath , acknowledg the whol to me . you may imagin what i felt and how i act . regard for my sist 's credit and feel prev any publ expos ; but i wrot to mr. wickham , who left the plac immedy , and mrs. young was of cours remov from her charg . mr. wickham 's chief object was unquest my sist 's fortun , which is thirty thousand pound ; but i can not help suppos that the hop of reveng himself on me was a strong induc . his reveng would hav been complet indee . `` thi , madam , is a faith nar of every ev in which we hav been concern togeth ; and if you do not absolv reject it as fals , you wil , i hop , acquit me hencefor of cruel toward mr. wickham . i know not in what man , und what form of fals he had impos on you ; but his success is not perhap to be wond at . ign as you prevy wer of everyth concern eith , detect could not be in yo pow , and susp certain not in yo inclin . `` you may poss wond why al thi was not told you last night ; but i was not then mast enough of myself to know what could or ought to be rev . for the tru of everyth her rel , i can ap mor particul to the testimony of colonel fitzwilliam , who , from our near rel and const intim , and , stil mor , as on of the execut of my fath 's wil , has been unavoid acquaint with every particul of thes transact . if yo abhor of me should mak my assert valueless , you can not be prev by the sam caus from confid in my cousin ; and that ther may be the poss of consult him , i shal endeavo to find som opportun of put thi let in yo hand in the cours of the morn . i wil on ad , god bless you . `` fitzwilliam darcy '' chapt 36 if elizabe , when mr. darcy gav her the let , did not expect it to contain a renew of his off , she had form no expect at al of it cont . but such as they wer , it may wel be suppos how eag she went through them , and what a cont of emot they excit . her feel as she read wer scarc to be defin . with amaz did she first understand that he believ any apolog to be in his pow ; and steadfast was she persuad , that he could hav no expl to giv , which a just sens of sham would not cont . with a strong prejud against everyth he might say , she beg his account of what had hap at netherfield . she read with an eag which hard left her pow of comprehend , and from impaty of know what the next sent might bring , was incap of attend to the sens of the on bef her ey . his believ of her sist 's insens she inst resolv to be fals ; and his account of the real , the worst object to the match , mad her too angry to hav any wish of doing him just . he express no regret for what he had don which satisfy her ; his styl was not penit , but haughty . it was al prid and insol . but when thi subject was success by his account of mr. wickham—when she read with somewh clear at a rel of ev which , if tru , must overthrow every cher opin of his wor , and which bor so alarm an affin to his own hist of himself—her feel wer yet mor acut pain and mor difficult of definit . aston , apprehend , and ev hor , oppress her . she wish to discredit it entir , rep exclaim , `` thi must be fals ! thi can not be ! thi must be the grossest fals ! `` —and when she had gon through the whol let , though scarc know anyth of the last pag or two , put it hasty away , protest that she would not regard it , that she would nev look in it again . in thi perturb stat of mind , with thought that could rest on noth , she walk on ; but it would not do ; in half a minut the let was unfold again , and collect herself as wel as she could , she again beg the mort perus of al that rel to wickham , and command herself so far as to examin the mean of every sent . the account of his connect with the pemberley famy was exact what he had rel himself ; and the kind of the lat mr. darcy , though she had not bef known it ext , agree eq wel with his own word . so far each recit confirm the oth ; but when she cam to the wil , the diff was gre . what wickham had said of the liv was fresh in her mem , and as she recal his very word , it was imposs not to feel that ther was gross dupl on on sid or the oth ; and , for a few mom , she flat herself that her wish did not er . but when she read and re-read with the closest at , the particul immedy follow of wickham 's resign al pretend to the liv , of his receiv in lieu so consid a sum as three thousand pound , again was she forc to hesit . she put down the let , weigh every circumst with what she meant to be impartiality—deliberated on the prob of each statement—but with littl success . on both sid it was on assert . again she read on ; but every lin prov mor clear that the affair , which she had believ it imposs that any cont could so repres as to rend mr. darcy 's conduc in it less than infam , was cap of a turn which must mak him entir blameless throughout the whol . the extrav and gen proflig which he scrupled not to lay at mr. wickham 's charg , excess shock her ; the mor so , as she could bring no proof of it injust . she had nev heard of him bef his ent into the ——shire milit , in which he had eng at the persuas of the young man who , on meet him accid in town , had ther renew a slight acquaint . of his form way of lif noth had been known in hertfordshir but what he told himself . as to his real charact , had inform been in her pow , she had nev felt a wish of inquir . his count , voic , and man had est him at ont in the possess of every virtu . she tri to recollect som inst of good , som distinct trait of integr or benevol , that might rescu him from the attack of mr. darcy ; or at least , by the predomin of virtu , aton for thos cas er und which she would endeavo to class what mr. darcy had describ as the idl and vic of many year ' continu . but no such recollect befriend her . she could see him inst bef her , in every charm of air and address ; but she could rememb no mor subst good than the gen approb of the neighbo , and the regard which his soc pow had gain him in the mess . aft paus on thi point a consid whil , she ont mor continu to read . but , ala ! the story which follow , of his design on miss darcy , receiv som confirm from what had pass between colonel fitzwilliam and herself on the morn bef ; and at last she was refer for the tru of every particul to colonel fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had prevy receiv the inform of his near concern in al his cousin 's affair , and whos charact she had no reason to quest . at on tim she had almost resolv on apply to him , but the ide was check by the awkward of the apply , and at leng whol ban by the convict that mr. darcy would nev hav hazard such a propos , if he had not been wel ass of his cousin 's corrob . she perfect rememb everyth that had pass in convers between wickham and herself , in their first ev at mr. phillip 's . many of his express wer stil fresh in her mem . she was now struck with the impropry of such commun to a stranger , and wond it had escap her bef . she saw the indel of put himself forward as he had don , and the inconsist of his profess with his conduc . she rememb that he had boast of hav no fear of see mr. darcy—that mr. darcy might leav the country , but that he should stand his ground ; yet he had avoid the netherfield bal the very next week . she rememb also that , til the netherfield famy had quit the country , he had told his story to no on but herself ; but that aft their remov it had been everywh discuss ; that he had then no reserv , no scruples in sink mr. darcy 's charact , though he had ass her that respect for the fath would alway prev his expos the son . how diff did everyth now appear in which he was concern ! his at to miss king wer now the consequ of view sol and hat merc ; and the mediocr of her fortun prov no long the mod of his wish , but his eag to grasp at anyth . his behavio to herself could now hav had no tol mot ; he had eith been deceiv with regard to her fortun , or had been grat his van by enco the pref which she believ she had most incauty shown . every ling struggle in his favo grew faint and faint ; and in farth just of mr. darcy , she could not but allow that mr. bingley , when quest by jan , had long ago assert his blameless in the affair ; that proud and repuls as wer his man , she had nev , in the whol cours of their acquaintance—an acquaint which had lat brought them much togeth , and giv her a sort of intim with his ways—seen anyth that betray him to be unprincipl or unjust—anything that spok him of irreligy or im habit ; that among his own connect he was esteem and valued—that ev wickham had allow him merit as a broth , and that she had oft heard him speak so affect of his sist as to prov him cap of som amy feel ; that had his act been what mr. wickham repres them , so gross a viol of everyth right could hard hav been cont from the world ; and that friend between a person cap of it , and such an amy man as mr. bingley , was incomprehens . she grew absolv asham of herself . of neith darcy nor wickham could she think without feel she had been blind , part , prejud , absurd . `` how desp i hav act ! '' she cri ; `` i , who hav prid myself on my discern ! i , who hav valu myself on my abl ! who hav oft disdain the gen cando of my sist , and grat my van in useless or blam mistrust ! how humy is thi discovery ! yet , how just a humy ! had i been in lov , i could not hav been mor wretch blind ! but van , not lov , has been my fol . pleas with the pref of on , and offend by the neglect of the oth , on the very begin of our acquaint , i hav court prepossess and ign , and driv reason away , wher eith wer concern . til thi mom i nev knew myself . '' from herself to jane—from jan to bingley , her thought wer in a lin which soon brought to her recollect that mr. darcy 's expl ther had appear very insufficy , and she read it again . wid diff was the effect of a second perus . how could she deny that credit to his assert in on inst , which she had been oblig to giv in the oth ? he decl himself to be tot unsuspicy of her sist 's attach ; and she could not help rememb what charlot 's opin had alway been . neith could she deny the just of his describ of jan . she felt that jan 's feel , though ferv , wer littl display , and that ther was a const complac in her air and man not oft unit with gre sens . when she cam to that part of the let in which her famy wer ment in term of such mort , yet merit reproach , her sens of sham was sev . the just of the charg struck her too forc for den , and the circumst to which he particul allud as hav pass at the netherfield bal , and as confirm al his first disapprob , could not hav mad a stronger impress on his mind than on her . the comply to herself and her sist was not unfelt . it sooth , but it could not consol her for the contempt which had thu been self-attracted by the rest of her famy ; and as she consid that jan 's disappoint had in fact been the work of her nearest rel , and reflect how mat the credit of both must be hurt by such impropry of conduc , she felt depress beyond anyth she had ev known bef . aft wand along the lan for two hour , giv way to every vary of thought—re-considering ev , determin prob , and reconcil herself , as wel as she could , to a chang so sud and so import , fatigu , and a recollect of her long abs , mad her at leng return hom ; and she ent the hous with the wish of appear che as us , and the resolv of repress such reflect as must mak her unfit for convers . she was immedy told that the two gentlem from ros had each cal dur her abs ; mr. darcy , on for a few minut , to tak leave—but that colonel fitzwilliam had been sit with them at least an hour , hop for her return , and almost resolv to walk aft her til she could be found . elizabe could but just affect concern in miss him ; she real rejo at it . colonel fitzwilliam was no long an object ; she could think on of her let . chapt 37 the two gentlem left ros the next morn , and mr. collin hav been in wait near the lodg , to mak them his part ob , was abl to bring hom the pleas intellig , of their appear in very good heal , and in as tol spirit as could be expect , aft the melancho scen so lat gon through at ros . to ros he then hast , to consol lady catherin and her daught ; and on his return brought back , with gre satisfact , a mess from her lady , import that she felt herself so dul as to mak her very desir of hav them al to din with her . elizabe could not see lady catherin without recollect that , had she chos it , she might by thi tim hav been pres to her as her fut niec ; nor could she think , without a smil , of what her lady 's indign would hav been . `` what would she hav said ? how would she hav behav ? '' wer quest with which she amus herself . their first subject was the diminut of the ros party . `` i ass you , i feel it excess , '' said lady catherin ; `` i believ no on feel the loss of friend so much as i do . but i am particul attach to thes young men , and know them to be so much attach to me ! they wer excess sorry to go ! but so they alway ar . the dear colonel ral his spirit tol til just at last ; but darcy seem to feel it most acut , mor , i think , than last year . his attach to ros certain increas . '' mr. collin had a comply , and an allud to throw in her , which wer kind smil on by the moth and daught . lady catherin observ , aft din , that miss bennet seem out of spirit , and immedy account for it by herself , by suppos that she did not lik to go hom again so soon , she ad : '' but if that is the cas , you must writ to yo moth and beg that you may stay a littl long . mrs. collin wil be very glad of yo company , i am sur . '' `` i am much oblig to yo lady for yo kind invit , '' reply elizabe , `` but it is not in my pow to acceiv it . i must be in town next saturday . '' `` why , at that rat , you wil hav been her on six week . i expect you to stay two month . i told mrs. collin so bef you cam . ther can be no occas for yo going so soon . mrs. bennet could certain spar you for anoth fortnight . '' `` but my fath can not . he wrot last week to hurry my return . '' `` oh ! yo fath of cours may spar you , if yo moth can . daught ar nev of so much consequ to a fath . and if you wil stay anoth mon complet , it wil be in my pow to tak on of you as far as london , for i am going ther ear in jun , for a week ; and as dawson doe not object to the barouche-box , ther wil be very good room for on of you—and indee , if the weath should hap to be cool , i should not object to tak you both , as you ar neith of you larg . '' `` you ar al kind , madam ; but i believ we must abid by our origin plan . '' lady catherin seem resign . `` mrs. collin , you must send a serv with them . you know i alway speak my mind , and i can not bear the ide of two young wom travel post by themselv . it is high improp . you must cont to send somebody . i hav the greatest dislik in the world to that sort of thing . young wom should alway be prop guard and attend , accord to their situ in lif . when my niec georgian went to ramsg last sum , i mad a point of her hav two men-servants go with her . miss darcy , the daught of mr. darcy , of pemberley , and lady an , could not hav appear with propry in a diff man . i am excess at to al thos thing . you must send john with the young lady , mrs. collin . i am glad it occur to me to ment it ; for it would real be discredit to you to let them go alon . '' `` my unc is to send a serv for us . '' `` oh ! yo unc ! he keep a man-servant , doe he ? i am very glad you hav somebody who think of thes thing . wher shal you chang hors ? oh ! bromley , of cours . if you ment my nam at the bel , you wil be attend to . '' lady catherin had many oth quest to ask respect their journey , and as she did not answ them al herself , at was necess , which elizabe believ to be lucky for her ; or , with a mind so occupy , she might hav forgot wher she was . reflect must be reserv for solit hour ; whenev she was alon , she gav way to it as the greatest reliev ; and not a day went by without a solit walk , in which she might indulg in al the delight of unpleas recollect . mr. darcy 's let she was in a fair way of soon know by heart . she study every sent ; and her feel toward it writ wer at tim wid diff . when she rememb the styl of his address , she was stil ful of indign ; but when she consid how unjust she had condemn and upbraid him , her ang was turn against herself ; and his disappoint feel becam the object of compass . his attach excit gratitud , his gen charact respect ; but she could not approv him ; nor could she for a mom rep her refus , or feel the slightest inclin ev to see him again . in her own past behavio , ther was a const sourc of vex and regret ; and in the unhappy defect of her famy , a subject of yet heavy chagrin . they wer hopeless of remedy . her fath , cont with laugh at them , would nev exert himself to restrain the wild giddy of his youngest daught ; and her moth , with man so far from right herself , was entir insens of the evil . elizabe had frequ unit with jan in an endeavo to check the imprud of catherin and lyd ; but whil they wer support by their moth 's indulg , what chant could ther be of improv ? catherin , weak-spirited , irrit , and complet und lyd 's guid , had been alway affront by their adv ; and lyd , self-willed and careless , would scarc giv them a hear . they wer ign , idl , and vain . whil ther was an off in meryton , they would flirt with him ; and whil meryton was within a walk of longbourn , they would be going ther forev . anxy on jan 's behalf was anoth prevail concern ; and mr. darcy 's expl , by rest bingley to al her form good opin , height the sens of what jan had lost . his affect was prov to hav been sint , and his conduc clear of al blam , unless any could attach to the implicit of his confid in his friend . how griev then was the thought that , of a situ so desir in every respect , so replet with adv , so prom for happy , jan had been depr , by the fol and indecor of her own famy ! when to thes recollect was ad the develop of wickham 's charact , it may be easy believ that the happy spirit which had seldom been depress bef , wer now so much affect as to mak it almost imposs for her to appear tol che . their eng at ros wer as frequ dur the last week of her stay as they had been at first . the very last ev was spent ther ; and her lady again inquir minut into the particul of their journey , gav them direct as to the best method of pack , and was so urg on the necess of plac gown in the on right way , that mar thought herself oblig , on her return , to undo al the work of the morn , and pack her trunk afresh . when they part , lady catherin , with gre condescend , wish them a good journey , and invit them to com to hunsford again next year ; and miss de bourgh exert herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to both . chapt 38 on saturday morn elizabe and mr. collin met for breakfast a few minut bef the oth appear ; and he took the opportun of pay the part civil which he deem indispens necess . `` i know not , miss elizabe , '' said he , `` wheth mrs. collin has yet express her sens of yo kind in com to us ; but i am very certain you wil not leav the hous without receiv her thank for it . the favo of yo company has been much felt , i ass you . we know how littl ther is to tempt anyon to our humbl abod . our plain man of liv , our smal room and few domest , and the littl we see of the world , must mak hunsford extrem dul to a young lady lik yourself ; but i hop you wil believ us grat for the condescend , and that we hav don everyth in our pow to prev yo spend yo tim unpleas . '' elizabe was eag with her thank and ass of happy . she had spent six week with gre enjoy ; and the pleas of being with charlot , and the kind at she had receiv , must mak her feel the oblig . mr. collin was grat , and with a mor smil solemn reply : '' it giv me gre pleas to hear that you hav pass yo tim not disagr . we hav certain don our best ; and most fortun hav it in our pow to introduc you to very supery socy , and , from our connect with ros , the frequ mean of vary the humbl hom scen , i think we may flat ourselv that yo hunsford visit can not hav been entir irksom . our situ with regard to lady catherin 's famy is indee the sort of extraordin adv and bless which few can boast . you see on what a foot we ar . you see how contin we ar eng ther . in tru i must acknowledg that , with al the disadv of thi humbl parson , i should not think anyon abid in it an object of compass , whil they ar shar of our intim at ros . '' word wer insufficy for the elev of his feel ; and he was oblig to walk about the room , whil elizabe tri to unit civil and tru in a few short sent . `` you may , in fact , carry a very favo report of us into hertfordshir , my dear cousin . i flat myself at least that you wil be abl to do so . lady catherin 's gre at to mrs. collin you hav been a dai wit of ; and altogeth i trust it doe not appear that yo friend has drawn an unfortunate—but on thi point it wil be as wel to be sil . on let me ass you , my dear miss elizabe , that i can from my heart most cord wish you eq fel in marry . my dear charlot and i hav but on mind and on way of think . ther is in everyth a most remark resembl of charact and idea between us . we seem to hav been design for each oth . '' elizabe could saf say that it was a gre happy wher that was the cas , and with eq sint could ad , that she firm believ and rejo in his domest comfort . she was not sorry , howev , to hav the recit of them interrupt by the lady from whom they sprang . poor charlot ! it was melancho to leav her to such socy ! but she had chos it with her ey op ; and though evid regret that her visit wer to go , she did not seem to ask for compass . her hom and her housekeep , her par and her poultry , and al their depend concern , had not yet lost their charm . at leng the cha ar , the trunk wer fast on , the parcel plac within , and it was pronount to be ready . aft an affect part between the friend , elizabe was attend to the carry by mr. collin , and as they walk down the gard he was commit her with his best respect to al her famy , not forget his thank for the kind he had receiv at longbourn in the wint , and his comply to mr. and mrs. gardin , though unknown . he then hand her in , mar follow , and the door was on the point of being clos , when he sud remind them , with som constern , that they had hitherto forgot to leav any mess for the lady at ros . `` but , '' he ad , `` you wil of cours wish to hav yo humbl respect del to them , with yo grat thank for their kind to you whil you hav been her . '' elizabe mad no object ; the door was then allow to be shut , and the carry drov off . `` good gracy ! '' cri mar , aft a few minut ' sil , `` it seem but a day or two sint we first cam ! and yet how many thing hav hap ! '' `` a gre many indee , '' said her comp with a sigh . `` we hav din nin tim at ros , besid drink tea ther twic ! how much i shal hav to tel ! '' elizabe ad priv , `` and how much i shal hav to cont ! '' their journey was perform without much convers , or any alarm ; and within four hour of their leav hunsford they reach mr. gardin 's hous , wher they wer to remain a few day . jan look wel , and elizabe had littl opportun of study her spirit , amidst the vary eng which the kind of her aunt had reserv for them . but jan was to go hom with her , and at longbourn ther would be leis enough for observ . it was not without an effort , meanwhil , that she could wait ev for longbourn , bef she told her sist of mr. darcy 's propos . to know that she had the pow of rev what would so excess aston jan , and must , at the sam tim , so high grat whatev of her own van she had not yet been abl to reason away , was such a tempt to op as noth could hav conqu but the stat of indecid in which she remain as to the ext of what she should commun ; and her fear , if she ont ent on the subject , of being hurry into rep someth of bingley which might on griev her sist furth . chapt 39 it was the second week in may , in which the three young lady set out togeth from gracechurch street for the town of —— , in hertfordshir ; and , as they drew near the appoint in wher mr. bennet 's carry was to meet them , they quick perceiv , in tok of the coachm 's punct , both kitty and lyd look out of a dining-room up stair . thes two girl had been abov an hour in the plac , happy employ in visit an opposit millin , watch the sentinel on guard , and dress a salad and cucumb . aft welcom their sist , they triumph display a tabl set out with such cold meat as an in lard us afford , exclaim , `` is not thi nic ? is not thi an agr surpr ? '' `` and we mean to tre you al , '' ad lyd , `` but you must lend us the money , for we hav just spent our at the shop out ther . '' then , show her purchases— '' look her , i hav bought thi bonnet . i do not think it is very pretty ; but i thought i might as wel buy it as not . i shal pul it to piec as soon as i get hom , and see if i can mak it up any bet . '' and when her sist abus it as ug , she ad , with perfect unconcern , `` oh ! but ther wer two or three much ug in the shop ; and when i hav bought som prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh , i think it wil be very tol . besid , it wil not much sign what on wear thi sum , aft the ——shire hav left meryton , and they ar going in a fortnight . '' `` ar they indee ! '' cri elizabe , with the greatest satisfact . `` they ar going to be encamp near brighton ; and i do so want pap to tak us al ther for the sum ! it would be such a delicy scheme ; and i dar say would hard cost anyth at al . mamm would lik to go too of al thing ! on think what a mis sum els we shal hav ! '' `` ye , '' thought elizabe , `` that would be a delight scheme indee , and complet do for us at ont . good heav ! brighton , and a whol camp of soldy , to us , who hav been overset already by on poor regy of milit , and the month bal of meryton ! '' `` now i hav got som new for you , '' said lyd , as they sat down at tabl . `` what do you think ? it is excel news—capital news—and about a certain person we al lik ! '' jan and elizabe look at each oth , and the wait was told he nee not stay . lyd laugh , and said : '' ay , that is just lik yo form and discret . you thought the wait must not hear , as if he car ! i dar say he oft hear wors thing said than i am going to say . but he is an ug fellow ! i am glad he is gon . i nev saw such a long chin in my lif . wel , but now for my new ; it is about dear wickham ; too good for the wait , is it not ? ther is no dang of wickham 's marry mary king . ther 's for you ! she is gon down to her unc at liverpool : gon to stay . wickham is saf . '' `` and mary king is saf ! '' ad elizabe ; `` saf from a connect imprud as to fortun . '' `` she is a gre fool for going away , if she lik him . '' `` but i hop ther is no strong attach on eith sid , '' said jan . `` i am sur ther is not on his . i wil answ for it , he nev car three straws about her—who could about such a nasty littl freckl thing ? '' elizabe was shock to think that , howev incap of such coars of express herself , the coars of the senty was littl oth than her own breast had harbo and fant lib ! as soon as al had at , and the eld on paid , the carry was ord ; and aft som cont , the whol party , with al their box , work-bags , and parcel , and the unwelcom addit of kitty 's and lyd 's purchas , wer seat in it . `` how nic we ar al cram in , '' cri lyd . `` i am glad i bought my bonnet , if it is on for the fun of hav anoth bandbox ! wel , now let us be quit comfort and snug , and talk and laugh al the way hom . and in the first plac , let us hear what has hap to you al sint you went away . hav you seen any pleas men ? hav you had any flirt ? i was in gre hop that on of you would hav got a husband bef you cam back . jan wil be quit an old maid soon , i decl . she is almost three-and-twenty ! lord , how asham i should be of not being marry bef three-and-twenty ! my aunt phillip want you so to get husband , you ca n't think . she say lizzy had bet hav tak mr. collin ; but i do not think ther would hav been any fun in it . lord ! how i should lik to be marry bef any of you ; and then i would chaperon you about to al the bal . dear me ! we had such a good piec of fun the oth day at colonel forst 's . kitty and me wer to spend the day ther , and mrs. forst prom to hav a littl dant in the ev ; ( by the bye , mrs. forst and me ar such friend ! ) and so she ask the two harrington to com , but harriet was il , and so pen was forc to com by herself ; and then , what do you think we did ? we dress up chamberlayn in wom 's cloth on purpos to pass for a lady , on think what fun ! not a soul knew of it , but colonel and mrs. forst , and kitty and me , exceiv my aunt , for we wer forc to borrow on of her gown ; and you can not imagin how wel he look ! when denny , and wickham , and prat , and two or three mor of the men cam in , they did not know him in the least . lord ! how i laugh ! and so did mrs. forst . i thought i should hav died . and that mad the men suspect someth , and then they soon found out what was the mat . '' with such kind of hist of their party and good jok , did lyd , assist by kitty 's hint and addit , endeavo to amus her comp al the way to longbourn . elizabe list as littl as she could , but ther was no escap the frequ ment of wickham 's nam . their receiv at hom was most kind . mrs. bennet rejo to see jan in undimin beauty ; and mor than ont dur din did mr. bennet say volunt to elizabe : '' i am glad you ar com back , lizzy . '' their party in the dining-room was larg , for almost al the lucas cam to meet mar and hear the new ; and vary wer the subject that occupy them : lady luca was inquir of mar , aft the welf and poultry of her eldest daught ; mrs. bennet was doubl eng , on on hand collect an account of the pres fash from jan , who sat som way below her , and , on the oth , retail them al to the young lucas ; and lyd , in a voic rath loud than any oth person 's , was enum the vary pleas of the morn to anybody who would hear her . `` oh ! mary , '' said she , `` i wish you had gon with us , for we had such fun ! as we went along , kitty and i drew up the blind , and pretend ther was nobody in the coach ; and i should hav gon so al the way , if kitty had not been sick ; and when we got to the georg , i do think we behav very handsom , for we tre the oth three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world , and if you would hav gon , we would hav tre you too . and then when we cam away it was such fun ! i thought we nev should hav got into the coach . i was ready to die of laught . and then we wer so merry al the way hom ! we talk and laugh so loud , that anybody might hav heard us ten mil off ! '' to thi mary very grav reply , `` far be it from me , my dear sist , to deprecy such pleas ! they would doubtless be cong with the gen of fem mind . but i confess they would hav no charm for me—i should infinit pref a book . '' but of thi answ lyd heard not a word . she seldom list to anybody for mor than half a minut , and nev attend to mary at al . in the afternoon lyd was urg with the rest of the girl to walk to meryton , and to see how everybody went on ; but elizabe steady oppos the scheme . it should not be said that the miss bennet could not be at hom half a day bef they wer in pursuit of the off . ther was anoth reason too for her opposit . she dread see mr. wickham again , and was resolv to avoid it as long as poss . the comfort to her of the regy 's approach remov was indee beyond express . in a fortnight they wer to go—and ont gon , she hop ther could be noth mor to plagu her on his account . she had not been many hour at hom bef she found that the brighton scheme , of which lyd had giv them a hint at the in , was und frequ discuss between her par . elizabe saw direct that her fath had not the smallest int of yield ; but his answ wer at the sam tim so vagu and equivoc , that her moth , though oft disheart , had nev yet despair of success at last . chapt 40 elizabe 's impaty to acquaint jan with what had hap could no long be overcom ; and at leng , resolv to suppress every particul in which her sist was concern , and prep her to be surpr , she rel to her the next morn the chief of the scen between mr. darcy and herself . miss bennet 's aston was soon less by the strong sist part which mad any admir of elizabe appear perfect nat ; and al surpr was short lost in oth feel . she was sorry that mr. darcy should hav del his senty in a man so littl suit to recommend them ; but stil mor was she griev for the unhappy which her sist 's refus must hav giv him . `` his being so sur of success was wrong , '' said she , `` and certain ought not to hav appear ; but consid how much it must increas his disappoint ! '' `` indee , '' reply elizabe , `` i am hearty sorry for him ; but he has oth feel , which wil prob soon driv away his regard for me . you do not blam me , howev , for refus him ? '' `` blam you ! oh , no . '' `` but you blam me for hav spok so warm of wickham ? '' `` no—i do not know that you wer wrong in say what you did . '' `` but you wil know it , when i tel you what hap the very next day . '' she then spok of the let , rep the whol of it cont as far as they concern georg wickham . what a stroke was thi for poor jan ! who would wil hav gon through the world without believ that so much wick ex in the whol rac of mankind , as was her collect in on individ . nor was darcy 's vind , though grat to her feel , cap of consol her for such discovery . most earnest did she labo to prov the prob of er , and seek to clear the on without involv the oth . `` thi wil not do , '' said elizabe ; `` you nev wil be abl to mak both of them good for anyth . tak yo cho , but you must be satisfy with on on . ther is but such a quant of merit between them ; just enough to mak on good sort of man ; and of lat it has been shift about pretty much . for my part , i am inclin to believ it al darcy 's ; but you shal do as you choos . '' it was som tim , howev , bef a smil could be extort from jan . `` i do not know when i hav been mor shock , '' said she . `` wickham so very bad ! it is almost past believ . and poor mr. darcy ! dear lizzy , on consid what he must hav suff . such a disappoint ! and with the knowledg of yo il opin , too ! and hav to rel such a thing of his sist ! it is real too distress . i am sur you must feel it so . '' `` oh ! no , my regret and compass ar al don away by see you so ful of both . i know you wil do him such ampl just , that i am grow every mom mor unconcern and indiff . yo profus mak me sav ; and if you lam ov him much long , my heart wil be as light as a feath . '' `` poor wickham ! ther is such an express of good in his count ! such an op and gentl in his man ! '' `` ther certain was som gre mism in the educ of thos two young men . on has got al the good , and the oth al the appear of it . '' `` i nev thought mr. darcy so deficy in the appear of it as you us to do . '' `` and yet i meant to be uncommon clev in tak so decid a dislik to him , without any reason . it is such a spur to on 's geni , such an op for wit , to hav a dislik of that kind . on may be contin abud without say anyth just ; but on can not alway be laugh at a man without now and then stumbl on someth witty . '' `` lizzy , when you first read that let , i am sur you could not tre the mat as you do now . '' `` indee , i could not . i was uncomfort enough , i may say unhappy . and with no on to speak to about what i felt , no jan to comfort me and say that i had not been so very weak and vain and nonsens as i knew i had ! oh ! how i want you ! '' `` how unfortun that you should hav us such very strong express in speak of wickham to mr. darcy , for now they do appear whol undeserv . '' `` certain . but the misfortun of speak with bit is a most nat consequ of the prejud i had been enco . ther is on point on which i want yo adv . i want to be told wheth i ought , or ought not , to mak our acquaint in gen understand wickham 's charact . '' miss bennet paus a littl , and then reply , `` sur ther can be no occas for expos him so dread . what is yo opin ? '' `` that it ought not to be attempt . mr. darcy has not auth me to mak his commun publ . on the cont , every particul rel to his sist was meant to be kept as much as poss to myself ; and if i endeavo to undeceiv peopl as to the rest of his conduc , who wil believ me ? the gen prejud against mr. darcy is so viol , that it would be the dea of half the good peopl in meryton to attempt to plac him in an amy light . i am not eq to it . wickham wil soon be gon ; and theref it wil not sign to anyon her what he real is . som tim hent it wil be al found out , and then we may laugh at their stupid in not know it bef . at pres i wil say noth about it . '' `` you ar quit right . to hav his er mad publ might ruin him for ev . he is now , perhap , sorry for what he has don , and anxy to re-establish a charact . we must not mak him desp . '' the tumult of elizabe 's mind was allay by thi convers . she had got rid of two of the secret which had weigh on her for a fortnight , and was certain of a wil list in jan , whenev she might wish to talk again of eith . but ther was stil someth lurk behind , of which prud forbad the disclos . she dar not rel the oth half of mr. darcy 's let , nor explain to her sist how sint she had been valu by her friend . her was knowledg in which no on could partak ; and she was sens that noth less than a perfect understand between the party could just her in throwing off thi last encumbr of mystery . `` and then , '' said she , `` if that very improb ev should ev tak plac , i shal mer be abl to tel what bingley may tel in a much mor agr man himself . the liberty of commun can not be min til it has lost al it valu ! '' she was now , on being settl at hom , at leis to observ the real stat of her sist 's spirit . jan was not happy . she stil cher a very tend affect for bingley . hav nev ev fant herself in lov bef , her regard had al the warm of first attach , and , from her ag and disposit , gre steady than most first attach oft boast ; and so ferv did she valu his remembr , and pref him to every oth man , that al her good sens , and al her at to the feel of her friend , wer requisit to check the indulg of thos regret which must hav been injury to her own heal and their tranquil . `` wel , lizzy , '' said mrs. bennet on day , `` what is yo opin now of thi sad busy of jan 's ? for my part , i am determin nev to speak of it again to anybody . i told my sist phillip so the oth day . but i can not find out that jan saw anyth of him in london . wel , he is a very undeserv young man—and i do not suppos ther 's the least chant in the world of her ev get him now . ther is no talk of his com to netherfield again in the sum ; and i hav inquir of everybody , too , who is lik to know . '' `` i do not believ he wil ev liv at netherfield any mor . '' `` oh wel ! it is just as he choos . nobody want him to com . though i shal alway say he us my daught extrem il ; and if i was her , i would not hav put up with it . wel , my comfort is , i am sur jan wil die of a brok heart ; and then he wil be sorry for what he has don . '' but as elizabe could not receiv comfort from any such expect , she mad no answ . `` wel , lizzy , '' continu her moth , soon afterward , `` and so the collins liv very comfort , do they ? wel , wel , i on hop it wil last . and what sort of tabl do they keep ? charlot is an excel man , i dar say . if she is half as sharp as her moth , she is sav enough . ther is noth extrav in their housekeep , i dar say . '' `` no , noth at al . '' `` a gre deal of good man , depend upon it . ye , ye . they wil tak car not to outrun their incom . they wil nev be distress for money . wel , much good may it do them ! and so , i suppos , they oft talk of hav longbourn when yo fath is dead . they look upon it as quit their own , i dar say , whenev that hap . '' `` it was a subject which they could not ment bef me . '' `` no ; it would hav been strange if they had ; but i mak no doubt they oft talk of it between themselv . wel , if they can be easy with an est that is not law their own , so much the bet . i should be asham of hav on that was on entail on me . '' chapt 41 the first week of their return was soon gon . the second beg . it was the last of the regy 's stay in meryton , and al the young lady in the neighbo wer droop apac . the deject was almost univers . the eld miss bennet alon wer stil abl to eat , drink , and sleep , and pursu the us cours of their employ . very frequ wer they reproach for thi insens by kitty and lyd , whos own misery was extrem , and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the famy . `` good heav ! what is to becom of us ? what ar we to do ? '' would they oft exclaim in the bit of woe . `` how can you be smil so , lizzy ? '' their affect moth shar al their grief ; she rememb what she had herself end on a simil occas , five-and-twenty year ago . `` i am sur , '' said she , `` i cri for two day togeth when colonel mil 's regy went away . i thought i should hav brok my heart . '' `` i am sur i shal break min , '' said lyd . `` if on could but go to brighton ! '' observ mrs. bennet . `` oh , ye ! —if on could but go to brighton ! but pap is so disagr . '' `` a littl sea-bathing would set me up forev . '' `` and my aunt phillip is sur it would do me a gre deal of good , '' ad kitty . such wer the kind of lam resound perpet through longbourn hous . elizabe tri to be divert by them ; but al sens of pleas was lost in sham . she felt anew the just of mr. darcy 's object ; and nev had she been so much dispos to pardon his interf in the view of his friend . but the gloom of lyd 's prospect was short clear away ; for she receiv an invit from mrs. forst , the wif of the colonel of the regy , to accompany her to brighton . thi invalu friend was a very young wom , and very lat marry . a resembl in good humo and good spirit had recommend her and lyd to each oth , and out of their three month ' acquaint they had been intim two . the rapt of lyd on thi occas , her ad of mrs. forst , the delight of mrs. bennet , and the mort of kitty , ar scarc to be describ . whol inat to her sist 's feel , lyd flew about the hous in restless ecstasy , cal for everyon 's congrat , and laugh and talk with mor viol than ev ; whilst the luckless kitty continu in the parlo repin at her fat in term as unreason as her acc was peev . `` i can not see why mrs. forst should not ask me as wel as lyd , '' said she , `` though i am not her particul friend . i hav just as much right to be ask as she has , and mor too , for i am two year old . '' in vain did elizabe attempt to mak her reason , and jan to mak her resign . as for elizabe herself , thi invit was so far from excit in her the sam feel as in her moth and lyd , that she consid it as the dea war of al poss of common sens for the lat ; and detest as such a step must mak her wer it known , she could not help secret adv her fath not to let her go . she repres to him al the impropry of lyd 's gen behavio , the littl adv she could der from the friend of such a wom as mrs. forst , and the prob of her being yet mor imprud with such a comp at brighton , wher the tempt must be gre than at hom . he heard her at , and then said : '' lyd wil nev be easy until she has expos herself in som publ plac or oth , and we can nev expect her to do it with so littl expens or inconveny to her famy as und the pres circumst . '' `` if you wer aw , '' said elizabe , `` of the very gre disadv to us al which must ar from the publ not of lyd 's unguard and imprud manner—nay , which has already ar from it , i am sur you would judg diff in the affair . '' `` already ar ? '' rep mr. bennet . `` what , has she fright away som of yo lov ? poor littl lizzy ! but do not be cast down . such squeam youth as can not bear to be connect with a littl absurd ar not wor a regret . com , let me see the list of pity fellow who hav been kept aloof by lyd 's fol . '' `` indee you ar mistak . i hav no such injury to res . it is not of particul , but of gen evil , which i am now complain . our import , our respect in the world must be affect by the wild volatil , the ass and disdain of al restraint which mark lyd 's charact . excus me , for i must speak plain . if you , my dear fath , wil not tak the troubl of check her exub spirit , and of teach her that her pres pursuit ar not to be the busy of her lif , she wil soon be beyond the reach of amend . her charact wil be fix , and she wil , at sixteen , be the most determin flirt that ev mad herself or her famy ridic ; a flirt , too , in the worst and meanest degr of flirt ; without any attract beyond you and a tol person ; and , from the ign and empty of her mind , whol un to ward off any port of that univers contempt which her rag for admir wil excit . in thi dang kitty also is comprehend . she wil follow wherev lyd lead . vain , ign , idl , and absolv uncontrol ! oh ! my dear fath , can you suppos it poss that they wil not be cens and desp wherev they ar known , and that their sist wil not be oft involv in the disgrac ? '' mr. bennet saw that her whol heart was in the subject , and affect tak her hand said in reply : '' do not mak yourself uneasy , my lov . wherev you and jan ar known you must be respect and valu ; and you wil not appear to less adv for hav a coupl of—or i may say , three—very sil sist . we shal hav no peac at longbourn if lyd doe not go to brighton . let her go , then . colonel forst is a sens man , and wil keep her out of any real mischief ; and she is lucky too poor to be an object of prey to anybody . at brighton she wil be of less import ev as a common flirt than she has been her . the off wil find wom bet wor their not . let us hop , theref , that her being ther may teach her her own insign . at any rat , she can not grow many degr wors , without auth us to lock her up for the rest of her lif . '' with thi answ elizabe was forc to be cont ; but her own opin continu the sam , and she left him disappoint and sorry . it was not in her nat , howev , to increas her vex by dwel on them . she was confid of hav perform her duty , and to fret ov unavoid evil , or aug them by anxy , was no part of her disposit . had lyd and her moth known the subst of her conf with her fath , their indign would hard hav found express in their unit volubl . in lyd 's imagin , a visit to brighton compr every poss of earth happy . she saw , with the cre ey of fant , the streets of that gay bathing-place cov with off . she saw herself the object of at , to ten and to scor of them at pres unknown . she saw al the glory of the camp—its tent stretched for in beaut uniform of lin , crowd with the young and the gay , and dazzl with scarlet ; and , to complet the view , she saw herself seat benea a tent , tend flirt with at least six off at ont . had she known her sist sought to tear her from such prospect and such real as thes , what would hav been her sens ? they could hav been understood on by her moth , who might hav felt near the sam . lyd 's going to brighton was al that consol her for her melancho convict of her husband 's nev intend to go ther himself . but they wer entir ign of what had pass ; and their rapt continu , with littl intermit , to the very day of lyd 's leav hom . elizabe was now to see mr. wickham for the last tim . hav been frequ in company with him sint her return , agit was pretty wel ov ; the agit of form part entir so . she had ev learnt to detect , in the very gentl which had first delight her , an affect and a sam to disgust and weary . in his pres behavio to herself , moreov , she had a fresh sourc of displeas , for the inclin he soon test of renew thos int which had mark the ear part of their acquaint could on serv , aft what had sint pass , to provok her . she lost al concern for him in find herself thu select as the object of such idl and frivol gallantry ; and whil she steady repress it , could not but feel the reproof contain in his believ , that howev long , and for whatev caus , his at had been withdrawn , her van would be grat , and her pref sec at any tim by their renew . on the very last day of the regy 's remain at meryton , he din , with oth of the off , at longbourn ; and so littl was elizabe dispos to part from him in good humo , that on his mak som inquiry as to the man in which her tim had pass at hunsford , she ment colonel fitzwilliam 's and mr. darcy 's hav both spent three week at ros , and ask him , if he was acquaint with the form . he look surpr , displeas , alarm ; but with a mom 's recollect and a return smil , reply , that he had form seen him oft ; and , aft observ that he was a very gentlemanlik man , ask her how she had lik him . her answ was warm in his favo . with an air of indiff he soon afterward ad : '' how long did you say he was at ros ? '' `` near three week . '' `` and you saw him frequ ? '' `` ye , almost every day . '' `` his man ar very diff from his cousin 's . '' `` ye , very diff . but i think mr. darcy improv upon acquaint . '' `` indee ! '' cri mr. wickham with a look which did not escap her . `` and pray , may i ask ? — '' but check himself , he ad , in a gay ton , `` is it in address that he improv ? has he deign to ad aught of civil to his ordin styl ? —for i dar not hop , '' he continu in a low and mor sery ton , `` that he is improv in ess . '' `` oh , no ! '' said elizabe . `` in ess , i believ , he is very much what he ev was . '' whil she spok , wickham look as if scarc know wheth to rejo ov her word , or to distrust their mean . ther was a someth in her count which mad him list with an apprehend and anxy at , whil she ad : '' when i said that he improv on acquaint , i did not mean that his mind or his man wer in a stat of improv , but that , from know him bet , his disposit was bet understood . '' wickham 's alarm now appear in a height complect and agit look ; for a few minut he was sil , til , shak off his embarrass , he turn to her again , and said in the gentlest of acc : '' you , who so wel know my feel toward mr. darcy , wil ready comprehend how sint i must rejo that he is wis enough to assum ev the appear of what is right . his prid , in that direct , may be of serv , if not to himself , to many oth , for it must on det him from such foul misconduc as i hav suff by . i on fear that the sort of cauty to which you , i imagin , hav been allud , is mer adopt on his visit to his aunt , of whos good opin and judg he stand much in aw . his fear of her has alway op , i know , when they wer togeth ; and a good deal is to be imput to his wish of forward the match with miss de bourgh , which i am certain he has very much at heart . '' elizabe could not repress a smil at thi , but she answ on by a slight inclin of the head . she saw that he want to eng her on the old subject of his griev , and she was in no humo to indulg him . the rest of the ev pass with the appear , on his sid , of us che , but with no furth attempt to distinct elizabe ; and they part at last with mut civil , and poss a mut desir of nev meet again . when the party brok up , lyd return with mrs. forst to meryton , from whent they wer to set out ear the next morn . the sep between her and her famy was rath noisy than pathet . kitty was the on on who shed tear ; but she did weep from vex and envy . mrs. bennet was diffus in her good wish for the fel of her daught , and impress in her injunct that she should not miss the opportun of enjoy herself as much as possible—advic which ther was every reason to believ would be wel attend to ; and in the clam happy of lyd herself in bid farewel , the mor gentl adie of her sist wer ut without being heard . chapt 42 had elizabe 's opin been al drawn from her own famy , she could not hav form a very pleas opin of conjug fel or domest comfort . her fath , capt by you and beauty , and that appear of good humo which you and beauty gen giv , had marry a wom whos weak understand and illib mind had very ear in their marry put an end to al real affect for her . respect , esteem , and confid had van for ev ; and al his view of domest happy wer overthrown . but mr. bennet was not of a disposit to seek comfort for the disappoint which his own imprud had brought on , in any of thos pleas which too oft consol the unfortun for their fol or their vic . he was fond of the country and of book ; and from thes tast had ar his princip enjoy . to his wif he was very littl otherw indebt , than as her ign and fol had contribut to his amus . thi is not the sort of happy which a man would in gen wish to ow to his wif ; but wher oth pow of entertain ar want , the tru philosoph wil der benefit from such as ar giv . elizabe , howev , had nev been blind to the impropry of her fath 's behavio as a husband . she had alway seen it with pain ; but respect his abl , and grat for his affect tre of herself , she endeavo to forget what she could not overlook , and to ban from her thought that contin breach of conjug oblig and decor which , in expos his wif to the contempt of her own childr , was so high reprehens . but she had nev felt so strongly as now the disadv which must attend the childr of so unsuit a marry , nor ev been so ful aw of the evil ar from so ill-judged a direct of tal ; tal , which , right us , might at least hav preserv the respect of his daught , ev if incap of enlarg the mind of his wif . when elizabe had rejo ov wickham 's depart she found littl oth caus for satisfact in the loss of the regy . their party abroad wer less vary than bef , and at hom she had a moth and sist whos const repin at the dul of everyth around them threw a real gloom ov their domest circ ; and , though kitty might in tim regain her nat degr of sens , sint the disturb of her brain wer remov , her oth sist , from whos disposit gre evil might be apprehend , was lik to be hard in al her fol and ass by a situ of such doubl dang as a watering-place and a camp . upon the whol , theref , she found , what has been sometim found bef , that an ev to which she had been look with impaty desir did not , in tak plac , bring al the satisfact she had prom herself . it was consequ necess to nam som oth period for the com of act felicity—to hav som oth point on which her wish and hop might be fix , and by again enjoy the pleas of anticip , consol herself for the pres , and prep for anoth disappoint . her tour to the lak was now the object of her happiest thought ; it was her best consol for al the uncomfort hour which the discont of her moth and kitty mad inevit ; and could she hav includ jan in the scheme , every part of it would hav been perfect . `` but it is fortun , '' thought she , `` that i hav someth to wish for . wer the whol arrang complet , my disappoint would be certain . but her , by carry with me on ceaseless sourc of regret in my sist 's abs , i may reason hop to hav al my expect of pleas real . a scheme of which every part prom delight can nev be success ; and gen disappoint is on ward off by the def of som littl peculi vex . '' when lyd went away she prom to writ very oft and very minut to her moth and kitty ; but her let wer alway long expect , and alway very short . thos to her moth contain littl els than that they wer just return from the libr , wher such and such off had attend them , and wher she had seen such beauty orna as mad her quit wild ; that she had a new gown , or a new parasol , which she would hav describ mor ful , but was oblig to leav off in a viol hurry , as mrs. forst cal her , and they wer going off to the camp ; and from her correspond with her sist , ther was stil less to be learnt—for her let to kitty , though rath long , wer much too ful of lin und the word to be mad publ . aft the first fortnight or three week of her abs , heal , good humo , and che beg to reappear at longbourn . everyth wor a happy aspect . the famy who had been in town for the wint cam back again , and sum finery and sum eng aros . mrs. bennet was rest to her us quer ser ; and , by the middl of jun , kitty was so much recov as to be abl to ent meryton without tear ; an ev of such happy prom as to mak elizabe hop that by the follow christmas she might be so tol reason as not to ment an off abov ont a day , unless , by som cruel and malicy arrang at the war off , anoth regy should be quart in meryton . the tim fix for the begin of their northern tour was now fast approach , and a fortnight on was want of it , when a let ar from mrs. gardin , which at ont delay it com and curtail it ext . mr. gardin would be prev by busy from set out til a fortnight lat in july , and must be in london again within a mon , and as that left too short a period for them to go so far , and see so much as they had propos , or at least to see it with the leis and comfort they had built on , they wer oblig to giv up the lak , and substitut a mor contract tour , and , accord to the pres plan , wer to go no farth northward than derbyshir . in that county ther was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three week ; and to mrs. gardin it had a peculi strong attract . the town wher she had form pass som year of her lif , and wher they wer now to spend a few day , was prob as gre an object of her curios as al the celebr beauty of matlock , chatswor , dov , or the peak . elizabe was excess disappoint ; she had set her heart on see the lak , and stil thought ther might hav been tim enough . but it was her busy to be satisfied—and certain her temp to be happy ; and al was soon right again . with the ment of derbyshir ther wer many idea connect . it was imposs for her to see the word without think of pemberley and it own . `` but sur , '' said she , `` i may ent his county with impun , and rob it of a few petr spar without his perceiv me . '' the period of expect was now doubl . four week wer to pass away bef her unc and aunt 's ar . but they did pass away , and mr. and mrs. gardin , with their four childr , did at leng appear at longbourn . the childr , two girl of six and eight year old , and two young boy , wer to be left und the particul car of their cousin jan , who was the gen favourit , and whos steady sens and sweet of temp exact adapt her for attend to them in every way—teaching them , play with them , and lov them . the gardin stay on on night at longbourn , and set off the next morn with elizabe in pursuit of novel and amus . on enjoy was certain—that of suit of comp ; a suit which comprehend heal and temp to bear inconveniences—cheerful to enh every pleasure—and affect and intellig , which might supply it among themselv if ther wer disappoint abroad . it is not the object of thi work to giv a describ of derbyshir , nor of any of the remark plac through which their rout thith lay ; oxford , blenheim , warwick , kenilwor , birmingham , etc . ar sufficy known . a smal part of derbyshir is al the pres concern . to the littl town of lambton , the scen of mrs. gardin 's form resid , and wher she had lat learn som acquaint stil remain , they bent their step , aft hav seen al the princip wond of the country ; and within fiv mil of lambton , elizabe found from her aunt that pemberley was situ . it was not in their direct road , nor mor than a mil or two out of it . in talk ov their rout the ev bef , mrs. gardin express an inclin to see the plac again . mr. gardin decl his wil , and elizabe was apply to for her approb . `` my lov , should not you lik to see a plac of which you hav heard so much ? '' said her aunt ; `` a plac , too , with which so many of yo acquaint ar connect . wickham pass al his you ther , you know . '' elizabe was distress . she felt that she had no busy at pemberley , and was oblig to assum a disinclin for see it . she must own that she was tir of see gre hous ; aft going ov so many , she real had no pleas in fin carpet or satin curtain . mrs. gardin abus her stupid . `` if it wer mer a fin hous rich furn , '' said she , `` i should not car about it myself ; but the ground ar delight . they hav som of the finest wood in the country . '' elizabe said no more—but her mind could not acquiesc . the poss of meet mr. darcy , whil view the plac , inst occur . it would be dread ! she blush at the very ide , and thought it would be bet to speak op to her aunt than to run such a risk . but against thi ther wer object ; and she fin resolv that it could be the last resourc , if her priv inquiry to the abs of the famy wer unfavo answ . accord , when she retir at night , she ask the chambermaid wheth pemberley wer not a very fin plac ? what was the nam of it propriet ? and , with no littl alarm , wheth the famy wer down for the sum ? a most welcom neg follow the last question—and her alarm now being remov , she was at leis to feel a gre deal of curios to see the hous herself ; and when the subject was rev the next morn , and she was again apply to , could ready answ , and with a prop air of indiff , that she had not real any dislik to the scheme . to pemberley , theref , they wer to go . chapt 43 elizabe , as they drov along , watch for the first appear of pemberley wood with som perturb ; and when at leng they turn in at the lodg , her spirit wer in a high flut . the park was very larg , and contain gre vary of ground . they ent it in on of it lowest point , and drov for som tim through a beauty wood stretching ov a wid ext . elizabe 's mind was too ful for convers , but she saw and admir every remark spot and point of view . they grad ascend for half-a-mile , and then found themselv at the top of a consid emin , wher the wood ceas , and the ey was inst caught by pemberley hous , situ on the opposit sid of a valley , into which the road with som abrupt wound . it was a larg , handsom ston build , stand wel on ris ground , and back by a ridg of high woody hil ; and in front , a stream of som nat import was swel into gre , but without any art appear . it bank wer neith form nor fals adorn . elizabe was delight . she had nev seen a plac for which nat had don mor , or wher nat beauty had been so littl counteract by an awkward tast . they wer al of them warm in their admir ; and at that mom she felt that to be mistress of pemberley might be someth ! they descend the hil , cross the bridg , and drov to the door ; and , whil examin the near aspect of the hous , al her apprehend of meet it own return . she dread lest the chambermaid had been mistak . on apply to see the plac , they wer admit into the hal ; and elizabe , as they wait for the housekeep , had leis to wond at her being wher she was . the housekeep cam ; a respectable-looking eld wom , much less fin , and mor civil , than she had any not of find her . they follow her into the dining-parlour . it was a larg , wel proport room , handsom fit up . elizabe , aft slight survey it , went to a window to enjoy it prospect . the hil , crown with wood , which they had descend , receiv increas abrupt from the dist , was a beauty object . every disposit of the ground was good ; and she look on the whol scen , the riv , the tre scat on it bank and the wind of the valley , as far as she could trac it , with delight . as they pass into oth room thes object wer tak diff posit ; but from every window ther wer beauty to be seen . the room wer lofty and handsom , and their furnit suit to the fortun of it propriet ; but elizabe saw , with admir of his tast , that it was neith gaudy nor useless fin ; with less of splendour , and mor real eleg , than the furnit of ros . `` and of thi plac , '' thought she , `` i might hav been mistress ! with thes room i might now hav been famili acquaint ! instead of view them as a stranger , i might hav rejo in them as my own , and welcom to them as visit my unc and aunt . but no , '' —recollecting herself— '' that could nev be ; my unc and aunt would hav been lost to me ; i should not hav been allow to invit them . '' thi was a lucky recollection—it sav her from someth very lik regret . she long to inquir of the housekeep wheth her mast was real abs , but had not the cour for it . at leng howev , the quest was ask by her unc ; and she turn away with alarm , whil mrs. reynold reply that he was , ad , `` but we expect him to-morrow , with a larg party of friend . '' how rejo was elizabe that their own journey had not by any circumst been delay a day ! her aunt now cal her to look at a pict . she approach and saw the lik of mr. wickham , suspend , amongst sev oth miny , ov the mantelpiec . her aunt ask her , smil , how she lik it . the housekeep cam forward , and told them it was a pict of a young gentlem , the son of her lat mast 's steward , who had been brought up by him at his own expens . `` he is now gon into the army , '' she ad ; `` but i am afraid he has turn out very wild . '' mrs. gardin look at her niec with a smil , but elizabe could not return it . `` and that , '' said mrs. reynold , point to anoth of the miny , `` is my master—and very lik him . it was drawn at the sam tim as the other—about eight year ago . '' `` i hav heard much of yo mast 's fin person , '' said mrs. gardin , look at the pict ; `` it is a handsom fac . but , lizzy , you can tel us wheth it is lik or not . '' mrs. reynold respect for elizabe seem to increas on thi intim of her know her mast . `` doe that young lady know mr . darcy ? '' elizabe colo , and said : `` a littl . '' `` and do not you think him a very handsom gentlem , ma'am ? '' `` ye , very handsom . '' `` i am sur i know non so handsom ; but in the gallery up stair you wil see a fin , larg pict of him than thi . thi room was my lat mast 's favourit room , and thes miny ar just as they us to be then . he was very fond of them . '' thi account to elizabe for mr. wickham 's being among them . mrs. reynold then direct their at to on of miss darcy , drawn when she was on eight year old . `` and is miss darcy as handsom as her broth ? '' said mrs. gardin . `` oh ! yes—the handsomest young lady that ev was seen ; and so accompl ! —she play and sing al day long . in the next room is a new instru just com down for her—a pres from my mast ; she com her to-morrow with him . '' mr. gardin , whos man wer very easy and pleas , enco her commun by his quest and remark ; mrs. reynold , eith by prid or attach , had evid gre pleas in talk of her mast and his sist . `` is yo mast much at pemberley in the cours of the year ? '' `` not so much as i could wish , sir ; but i dar say he may spend half his tim her ; and miss darcy is alway down for the sum month . '' `` exceiv , '' thought elizabe , `` when she goe to ramsg . '' `` if yo mast would marry , you might see mor of him . '' `` ye , sir ; but i do not know when that wil be . i do not know who is good enough for him . '' mr. and mrs. gardin smil . elizabe could not help say , `` it is very much to his credit , i am sur , that you should think so . '' `` i say no mor than the tru , and everybody wil say that know him , '' reply the oth . elizabe thought thi was going pretty far ; and she list with increas aston as the housekeep ad , `` i hav nev known a cross word from him in my lif , and i hav known him ev sint he was four year old . '' thi was pra , of al oth most extraordin , most opposit to her idea . that he was not a good-temper man had been her firmest opin . her keenest at was awak ; she long to hear mor , and was grat to her unc for say : '' ther ar very few peopl of whom so much can be said . you ar lucky in hav such a mast . '' `` ye , sir , i know i am . if i wer to go through the world , i could not meet with a bet . but i hav alway observ , that they who ar good-natur when childr , ar good-natur when they grow up ; and he was alway the sweetest-tempered , most generous-hearted boy in the world . '' elizabe almost star at her . `` can thi be mr . darcy ? '' thought she . `` his fath was an excel man , '' said mrs. gardin . `` ye , ma'am , that he was indee ; and his son wil be just lik him—just as aff to the poor . '' elizabe list , wond , doubt , and was impaty for mor . mrs. reynold could interest her on no oth point . she rel the subject of the pict , the dimend of the room , and the pric of the furnit , in vain . mr. gardin , high amus by the kind of famy prejud to which he attribut her excess commend of her mast , soon led again to the subject ; and she dwelt with energy on his many merit as they process togeth up the gre staircas . `` he is the best landlord , and the best mast , '' said she , `` that ev liv ; not lik the wild young men nowaday , who think of noth but themselv . ther is not on of his ten or serv but wil giv him a good nam . som peopl cal him proud ; but i am sur i nev saw anyth of it . to my fant , it is on becaus he doe not rattl away lik oth young men . '' `` in what an amy light doe thi plac him ! '' thought elizabe . `` thi fin account of him , '' whisp her aunt as they walk , `` is not quit consist with his behavio to our poor friend . '' `` perhap we might be deceiv . '' `` that is not very lik ; our auth was too good . '' on reach the spacy lobby abov they wer shown into a very pretty sitting-room , lat fit up with gre eleg and light than the apart below ; and wer inform that it was but just don to giv pleas to miss darcy , who had tak a lik to the room when last at pemberley . `` he is certain a good broth , '' said elizabe , as she walk toward on of the window . mrs. reynold anticip miss darcy 's delight , when she should ent the room . `` and thi is alway the way with him , '' she ad . `` whatev can giv his sist any pleas is sur to be don in a mom . ther is noth he would not do for her . '' the picture-gallery , and two or three of the princip bedroom , wer al that remain to be shown . in the form wer many good paint ; but elizabe knew noth of the art ; and from such as had been already vis below , she had wil turn to look at som draw of miss darcy 's , in crayon , whos subject wer us mor interest , and also mor intellig . in the gallery ther wer many famy portrait , but they could hav littl to fix the at of a stranger . elizabe walk in quest of the on fac whos feat would be known to her . at last it arrest her—and she beheld a striking resembl to mr. darcy , with such a smil ov the fac as she rememb to hav sometim seen when he look at her . she stood sev minut bef the pict , in earnest contempl , and return to it again bef they quit the gallery . mrs. reynold inform them that it had been tak in his fath 's lifetim . ther was certain at thi mom , in elizabe 's mind , a mor gentl sens toward the origin than she had ev felt at the height of their acquaint . the commend bestow on him by mrs. reynold was of no trifl nat . what pra is mor valu than the pra of an intellig serv ? as a broth , a landlord , a mast , she consid how many peopl 's happy wer in his guard ! —how much of pleas or pain was it in his pow to bestow ! —how much of good or evil must be don by him ! every ide that had been brought forward by the housekeep was favo to his charact , and as she stood bef the canva on which he was repres , and fix his ey upon herself , she thought of his regard with a deep senty of gratitud than it had ev rais bef ; she rememb it warm , and soft it impropry of express . when al of the hous that was op to gen inspect had been seen , they return downstair , and , tak leav of the housekeep , wer consign ov to the gard , who met them at the hall-door . as they walk across the hal toward the riv , elizabe turn back to look again ; her unc and aunt stop also , and whil the form was conject as to the dat of the build , the own of it himself sud cam forward from the road , which led behind it to the stabl . they wer within twenty yard of each oth , and so abrupt was his appear , that it was imposs to avoid his sight . their ey inst met , and the cheek of both wer overspread with the deepest blush . he absolv start , and for a mom seem immov from surpr ; but short recov himself , adv toward the party , and spok to elizabe , if not in term of perfect compos , at least of perfect civil . she had instinct turn away ; but stop on his approach , receiv his comply with an embarrass imposs to be overcom . had his first appear , or his resembl to the pict they had just been examin , been insufficy to ass the oth two that they now saw mr. darcy , the gard 's express of surpr , on behold his mast , must immedy hav told it . they stood a littl aloof whil he was talk to their niec , who , aston and confus , scarc dar lift her ey to his fac , and knew not what answ she return to his civil inquiry aft her famy . amaz at the alt of his man sint they last part , every sent that he ut was increas her embarrass ; and every ide of the impropry of her being found ther recur to her mind , the few minut in which they continu wer som of the most uncomfort in her lif . nor did he seem much mor at eas ; when he spok , his acc had non of it us sed ; and he rep his inquiry as to the tim of her hav left longbourn , and of her hav stay in derbyshir , so oft , and in so hurry a way , as plain spok the distract of his thought . at leng every ide seem to fail him ; and , aft stand a few mom without say a word , he sud recollect himself , and took leav . the oth then join her , and express admir of his fig ; but elizabe heard not a word , and whol engross by her own feel , follow them in sil . she was overpow by sham and vex . her com ther was the most unfortun , the most ill-judged thing in the world ! how strange it must appear to him ! in what a disgrac light might it not strike so vain a man ! it might seem as if she had purpos thrown herself in his way again ! oh ! why did she com ? or , why did he thu com a day bef he was expect ? had they been on ten minut soon , they should hav been beyond the reach of his discrimin ; for it was plain that he was that mom arrived—that mom alight from his hors or his carry . she blush again and again ov the pervers of the meet . and his behavio , so strikingly altered—what could it mean ? that he should ev speak to her was amaz ! —but to speak with such civil , to inquir aft her famy ! nev in her lif had she seen his man so littl dign , nev had he spok with such gentl as on thi unexpect meet . what a contrast did it off to his last address in ros park , when he put his let into her hand ! she knew not what to think , or how to account for it . they had now ent a beauty walk by the sid of the wat , and every step was bring forward a nobl fal of ground , or a fin reach of the wood to which they wer approach ; but it was som tim bef elizabe was sens of any of it ; and , though she answ mech to the rep ap of her unc and aunt , and seem to direct her ey to such object as they point out , she distinct no part of the scen . her thought wer al fix on that on spot of pemberley hous , whichev it might be , wher mr. darcy then was . she long to know what at the mom was pass in his mind—in what man he thought of her , and wheth , in defy of everyth , she was stil dear to him . perhap he had been civil on becaus he felt himself at eas ; yet ther had been that in his voic which was not lik eas . wheth he had felt mor of pain or of pleas in see her she could not tel , but he certain had not seen her with compos . at leng , howev , the remark of her comp on her abs of mind ar her , and she felt the necess of appear mor lik herself . they ent the wood , and bid adieu to the riv for a whil , ascend som of the high ground ; when , in spot wher the op of the tre gav the ey pow to wand , wer many charm view of the valley , the opposit hil , with the long rang of wood overspread many , and occas part of the stream . mr. gardin express a wish of going round the whol park , but fear it might be beyond a walk . with a triumph smil they wer told that it was ten mil round . it settl the mat ; and they pursu the accustom circuit ; which brought them again , aft som tim , in a desc among hang wood , to the edg of the wat , and on of it narrowest part . they cross it by a simpl bridg , in charact with the gen air of the scen ; it was a spot less adorn than any they had yet visit ; and the valley , her contract into a glen , allow room on for the stream , and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bord it . elizabe long to expl it wind ; but when they had cross the bridg , and perceiv their dist from the hous , mrs. gardin , who was not a gre walk , could go no farth , and thought on of return to the carry as quick as poss . her niec was , theref , oblig to submit , and they took their way toward the hous on the opposit sid of the riv , in the nearest direct ; but their progress was slow , for mr. gardin , though seldom abl to indulg the tast , was very fond of fish , and was so much eng in watch the occas appear of som trout in the wat , and talk to the man about them , that he adv but littl . whilst wand on in thi slow man , they wer again surpr , and elizabe 's aston was quit eq to what it had been at first , by the sight of mr. darcy approach them , and at no gre dist . the walk her being her less shelt than on the oth sid , allow them to see him bef they met . elizabe , howev aston , was at least mor prep for an interview than bef , and resolv to appear and to speak with calm , if he real intend to meet them . for a few mom , indee , she felt that he would prob strike into som oth path . the ide last whil a turn in the walk cont him from their view ; the turn past , he was immedy bef them . with a glant , she saw that he had lost non of his rec civil ; and , to imit his polit , she beg , as they met , to admir the beauty of the plac ; but she had not got beyond the word `` delight , '' and `` charm , '' when som unlucky recollect obtrud , and she fant that pra of pemberley from her might be mischiev constru . her colo chang , and she said no mor . mrs. gardin was stand a littl behind ; and on her paus , he ask her if she would do him the hono of introduc him to her friend . thi was a stroke of civil for which she was quit unprep ; and she could hard suppress a smil at his being now seek the acquaint of som of thos very peopl against whom his prid had revolt in his off to herself . `` what wil be his surpr , '' thought she , `` when he know who they ar ? he tak them now for peopl of fash . '' the introduc , howev , was immedy mad ; and as she nam their rel to herself , she stol a sly look at him , to see how he bor it , and was not without the expect of his decamp as fast as he could from such disgrac comp . that he was surpr by the connect was evid ; he sustain it , howev , with fortitud , and so far from going away , turn back with them , and ent into convers with mr. gardin . elizabe could not but be pleas , could not but triumph . it was consol that he should know she had som rel for whom ther was no nee to blush . she list most at to al that pass between them , and glory in every express , every sent of her unc , which mark his intellig , his tast , or his good man . the convers soon turn upon fish ; and she heard mr. darcy invit him , with the greatest civil , to fish ther as oft as he chos whil he continu in the neighbo , off at the sam tim to supply him with fish tackl , and point out thos part of the stream wher ther was us most sport . mrs. gardin , who was walk arm-in-arm with elizabe , gav her a look express of wond . elizabe said noth , but it grat her excess ; the comply must be al for herself . her aston , howev , was extrem , and contin was she rep , `` why is he so alt ? from what can it process ? it can not be for me—it can not be for my sak that his man ar thu soft . my reproof at hunsford could not work such a chang as thi . it is imposs that he should stil lov me . '' aft walk som tim in thi way , the two lady in front , the two gentlem behind , on resum their plac , aft descend to the brink of the riv for the bet inspect of som cury water-plant , ther chant to be a littl alt . it origin in mrs. gardin , who , fatigu by the exerc of the morn , found elizabe 's arm inadequ to her support , and consequ prefer her husband 's . mr. darcy took her plac by her niec , and they walk on togeth . aft a short sil , the lady first spok . she wish him to know that she had been ass of his abs bef she cam to the plac , and accord beg by observ , that his ar had been very unexpected— '' for yo housekeep , '' she ad , `` inform us that you would certain not be her til to-morrow ; and indee , bef we left bakewel , we understood that you wer not immedy expect in the country . '' he acknowledg the tru of it al , and said that busy with his steward had occas his com forward a few hour bef the rest of the party with whom he had been travel . `` they wil join me ear to-morrow , '' he continu , `` and among them ar som who wil claim an acquaint with you—mr . bingley and his sist . '' elizabe answ on by a slight bow . her thought wer inst driv back to the tim when mr. bingley 's nam had been the last ment between them ; and , if she might judg by his complect , his mind was not very diff eng . `` ther is also on oth person in the party , '' he continu aft a paus , `` who mor particul wish to be known to you . wil you allow me , or do i ask too much , to introduc my sist to yo acquaint dur yo stay at lambton ? '' the surpr of such an apply was gre indee ; it was too gre for her to know in what man she acc to it . she immedy felt that whatev desir miss darcy might hav of being acquaint with her must be the work of her broth , and , without look farth , it was satisfact ; it was grat to know that his res had not mad him think real il of her . they now walk on in sil , each of them deep in thought . elizabe was not comfort ; that was imposs ; but she was flat and pleas . his wish of introduc his sist to her was a comply of the highest kind . they soon outstrip the oth , and when they had reach the carry , mr. and mrs. gardin wer half a quart of a mil behind . he then ask her to walk into the house—but she decl herself not tir , and they stood togeth on the lawn . at such a tim much might hav been said , and sil was very awkward . she want to talk , but ther seem to be an embargo on every subject . at last she recollect that she had been travel , and they talk of matlock and dov dal with gre persev . yet tim and her aunt mov slowly—and her paty and her idea wer near worn out bef the tete-a-tet was ov . on mr. and mrs. gardin 's com up they wer al press to go into the hous and tak som refresh ; but thi was declin , and they part on each sid with utmost polit . mr. darcy hand the lady into the carry ; and when it drov off , elizabe saw him walk slow toward the hous . the observ of her unc and aunt now beg ; and each of them pronount him to be infinit supery to anyth they had expect . `` he is perfect wel behav , polit , and unassum , '' said her unc . `` ther is someth a littl stat in him , to be sur , '' reply her aunt , `` but it is confin to his air , and is not unbecom . i can now say with the housekeep , that though som peopl may cal him proud , i hav seen noth of it . '' `` i was nev mor surpr than by his behavio to us . it was mor than civil ; it was real at ; and ther was no necess for such at . his acquaint with elizabe was very trifl . '' `` to be sur , lizzy , '' said her aunt , `` he is not so handsom as wickham ; or , rath , he has not wickham 's count , for his feat ar perfect good . but how cam you to tel me that he was so disagr ? '' elizabe excus herself as wel as she could ; said that she had lik him bet when they had met in kent than bef , and that she had nev seen him so pleas as thi morn . `` but perhap he may be a littl whims in his civil , '' reply her unc . `` yo gre men oft ar ; and theref i shal not tak him at his word , as he might chang his mind anoth day , and warn me off his ground . '' elizabe felt that they had entir misunderstood his charact , but said noth . `` from what we hav seen of him , '' continu mrs. gardin , `` i real should not hav thought that he could hav behav in so cruel a way by anybody as he has don by poor wickham . he has not an ill-natured look . on the cont , ther is someth pleas about his mou when he speak . and ther is someth of dign in his count that would not giv on an unfavo ide of his heart . but , to be sur , the good lady who show us his hous did giv him a most flam charact ! i could hard help laugh aloud sometim . but he is a lib mast , i suppos , and that in the ey of a serv comprehend every virtu . '' elizabe her felt herself cal on to say someth in vind of his behavio to wickham ; and theref gav them to understand , in as guard a man as she could , that by what she had heard from his rel in kent , his act wer cap of a very diff construct ; and that his charact was by no mean so faul , nor wickham 's so amy , as they had been consid in hertfordshir . in confirm of thi , she rel the particul of al the pecuny transact in which they had been connect , without act nam her auth , but stat it to be such as might be rely on . mrs. gardin was surpr and concern ; but as they wer now approach the scen of her form pleas , every ide gav way to the charm of recollect ; and she was too much eng in point out to her husband al the interest spot in it environ to think of anyth els . fatigu as she had been by the morn 's walk they had no soon din than she set off again in quest of her form acquaint , and the ev was spent in the satisfact of a intercours renew aft many year ' discontinu . the occur of the day wer too ful of interest to leav elizabe much at for any of thes new friend ; and she could do noth but think , and think with wond , of mr. darcy 's civil , and , abov al , of his wish her to be acquaint with his sist . chapt 44 elizabe had settl it that mr. darcy would bring his sist to visit her the very day aft her reach pemberley ; and was consequ resolv not to be out of sight of the in the whol of that morn . but her conclud was fals ; for on the very morn aft their ar at lambton , thes visit cam . they had been walk about the plac with som of their new friend , and wer just return to the in to dress themselv for din with the sam famy , when the sound of a carry drew them to a window , and they saw a gentlem and a lady in a curric driv up the street . elizabe immedy recogn the livery , guess what it meant , and impart no smal degr of her surpr to her rel by acquaint them with the hono which she expect . her unc and aunt wer al amaz ; and the embarrass of her man as she spok , join to the circumst itself , and many of the circumst of the prec day , op to them a new ide on the busy . noth had ev suggest it bef , but they felt that ther was no oth way of account for such at from such a quart than by suppos a part for their niec . whil thes newly-born not wer pass in their head , the perturb of elizabe 's feel was at every mom increas . she was quit amaz at her own discompos ; but amongst oth caus of disquiet , she dread lest the part of the broth should hav said too much in her favo ; and , mor than common anxy to pleas , she nat suspect that every pow of pleas would fail her . she ret from the window , fear of being seen ; and as she walk up and down the room , endeavo to compos herself , saw such look of inquir surpr in her unc and aunt as mad everyth wors . miss darcy and her broth appear , and thi formid introduc took plac . with aston did elizabe see that her new acquaint was at least as much embarrass as herself . sint her being at lambton , she had heard that miss darcy was excess proud ; but the observ of a very few minut convint her that she was on excess shy . she found it difficult to obtain ev a word from her beyond a monosyl . miss darcy was tal , and on a larg scal than elizabe ; and , though littl mor than sixteen , her fig was form , and her appear wom and grac . she was less handsom than her broth ; but ther was sens and good humo in her fac , and her man wer perfect unassum and gentl . elizabe , who had expect to find in her as acut and unembarrass an observ as ev mr. darcy had been , was much reliev by discern such diff feel . they had not long been togeth bef mr. darcy told her that bingley was also com to wait on her ; and she had bar tim to express her satisfact , and prep for such a visit , when bingley 's quick step was heard on the stair , and in a mom he ent the room . al elizabe 's ang against him had been long don away ; but had she stil felt any , it could hard hav stood it ground against the unaffect cord with which he express himself on see her again . he inquir in a friend , though gen way , aft her famy , and look and spok with the sam good-humour eas that he had ev don . to mr. and mrs. gardin he was scarc a less interest person than to herself . they had long wish to see him . the whol party bef them , indee , excit a liv at . the susp which had just ar of mr. darcy and their niec direct their observ toward each with an earnest though guard inquiry ; and they soon drew from thos inquiry the ful convict that on of them at least knew what it was to lov . of the lady 's sens they remain a littl in doubt ; but that the gentlem was overflow with admir was evid enough . elizabe , on her sid , had much to do . she want to ascertain the feel of each of her visit ; she want to compos her own , and to mak herself agr to al ; and in the lat object , wher she fear most to fail , she was most sur of success , for thos to whom she endeavo to giv pleas wer prepossess in her favo . bingley was ready , georgian was eag , and darcy determin , to be pleas . in see bingley , her thought nat flew to her sist ; and , oh ! how ard did she long to know wheth any of his wer direct in a lik man . sometim she could fant that he talk less than on form occas , and ont or twic pleas herself with the not that , as he look at her , he was try to trac a resembl . but , though thi might be imagin , she could not be deceiv as to his behavio to miss darcy , who had been set up as a riv to jan . no look appear on eith sid that spok particul regard . noth occur between them that could just the hop of his sist . on thi point she was soon satisfy ; and two or three littl circumst occur er they part , which , in her anxy interpret , denot a recollect of jan not untinct by tend , and a wish of say mor that might lead to the ment of her , had he dar . he observ to her , at a mom when the oth wer talk togeth , and in a ton which had someth of real regret , that it `` was a very long tim sint he had had the pleas of see her ; '' and , bef she could reply , he ad , `` it is abov eight month . we hav not met sint the 26th of novemb , when we wer al dant togeth at netherfield . '' elizabe was pleas to find his mem so exact ; and he afterward took occas to ask her , when unattend to by any of the rest , wheth al her sist wer at longbourn . ther was not much in the quest , nor in the prec remark ; but ther was a look and a man which gav them mean . it was not oft that she could turn her ey on mr. darcy himself ; but , whenev she did catch a glimps , she saw an express of gen compla , and in al that he said she heard an acc so remov from haut or disdain of his comp , as convint her that the improv of man which she had yesterday wit howev temp it ex might prov , had at least outl on day . when she saw him thu seek the acquaint and court the good opin of peopl with whom any intercours a few month ago would hav been a disgrace—when she saw him thu civil , not on to herself , but to the very rel whom he had op disdain , and recollect their last liv scen in hunsford parsonage—th diff , the chang was so gre , and struck so forc on her mind , that she could hard restrain her aston from being vis . nev , ev in the company of his dear friend at netherfield , or his dign rel at ros , had she seen him so desir to pleas , so fre from self-consequence or unbend reserv , as now , when no import could result from the success of his endeavo , and when ev the acquaint of thos to whom his at wer address would draw down the ridic and cens of the lady both of netherfield and ros . their visit stay with them abov half-an-hour ; and when they aros to depart , mr. darcy cal on his sist to join him in express their wish of see mr. and mrs. gardin , and miss bennet , to din at pemberley , bef they left the country . miss darcy , though with a diffid which mark her littl in the habit of giv invit , ready obey . mrs. gardin look at her niec , desir of know how she , whom the invit most concern , felt dispos as to it acceiv , but elizabe had turn away her head . presum howev , that thi study avoid spok rath a mom embarrass than any dislik of the propos , and see in her husband , who was fond of socy , a perfect wil to acceiv it , she vent to eng for her attend , and the day aft the next was fix on . bingley express gre pleas in the certainty of see elizabe again , hav stil a gre deal to say to her , and many inquiry to mak aft al their hertfordshir friend . elizabe , constru al thi into a wish of hear her speak of her sist , was pleas , and on thi account , as wel as som oth , found herself , when their visit left them , cap of consid the last half-hour with som satisfact , though whil it was pass , the enjoy of it had been littl . eag to be alon , and fear of inquiry or hint from her unc and aunt , she stay with them on long enough to hear their favo opin of bingley , and then hurry away to dress . but she had no reason to fear mr. and mrs. gardin 's curios ; it was not their wish to forc her commun . it was evid that she was much bet acquaint with mr. darcy than they had bef any ide of ; it was evid that he was very much in lov with her . they saw much to interest , but noth to just inquiry . of mr. darcy it was now a mat of anxy to think wel ; and , as far as their acquaint reach , ther was no fault to find . they could not be untouch by his polit ; and had they drawn his charact from their own feel and his serv 's report , without any ref to any oth account , the circ in hertfordshir to which he was known would not hav recogn it for mr. darcy . ther was now an interest , howev , in believ the housekeep ; and they soon becam sens that the auth of a serv who had known him sint he was four year old , and whos own man ind respect , was not to be hasty reject . neith had anyth occur in the intellig of their lambton friend that could mat less it weight . they had noth to accus him of but prid ; prid he prob had , and if not , it would certain be imput by the inhabit of a smal market-town wher the famy did not visit . it was acknowledg , howev , that he was a lib man , and did much good among the poor . with respect to wickham , the travel soon found that he was not held ther in much estim ; for though the chief of his concern with the son of his patron wer imperfect understood , it was yet a well-known fact that , on his quit derbyshir , he had left many debt behind him , which mr. darcy afterward discharg . as for elizabe , her thought wer at pemberley thi ev mor than the last ; and the ev , though as it pass it seem long , was not long enough to determin her feel toward on in that mand ; and she lay awak two whol hour endeavo to mak them out . she certain did not hat him . no ; hat had van long ago , and she had almost as long been asham of ev feel a dislik against him , that could be so cal . the respect cre by the convict of his valu qual , though at first unwil admit , had for som tim ceas to be repugn to her feel ; and it was now height into somewh of a friend nat , by the testimony so high in his favo , and bring forward his disposit in so amy a light , which yesterday had produc . but abov al , abov respect and esteem , ther was a mot within her of goodwil which could not be overlook . it was gratitud ; gratitud , not mer for hav ont lov her , but for lov her stil wel enough to forg al the pet and acrimony of her man in reject him , and al the unjust accus accompany her reject . he who , she had been persuad , would avoid her as his greatest enemy , seem , on thi accid meet , most eag to preserv the acquaint , and without any indel display of regard , or any peculi of man , wher their two selv on wer concern , was solicit the good opin of her friend , and bent on mak her known to his sist . such a chang in a man of so much prid excit not on aston but gratitude—for to lov , ard lov , it must be attribut ; and as such it impress on her was of a sort to be enco , as by no mean unpleas , though it could not be exact defin . she respect , she esteem , she was grat to him , she felt a real interest in his welf ; and she on want to know how far she wish that welf to depend upon herself , and how far it would be for the happy of both that she should employ the pow , which her fant told her she stil possess , of bring on her the renew of his address . it had been settl in the ev between the aunt and the niec , that such a striking civil as miss darcy 's in com to see them on the very day of her ar at pemberley , for she had reach it on to a lat breakfast , ought to be imit , though it could not be equal , by som exert of polit on their sid ; and , consequ , that it would be high expedy to wait on her at pemberley the follow morn . they wer , theref , to go . elizabe was pleas ; though when she ask herself the reason , she had very littl to say in reply . mr. gardin left them soon aft breakfast . the fish scheme had been renew the day bef , and a posit eng mad of his meet som of the gentlem at pemberley bef noon . chapt 45 convint as elizabe now was that miss bingley 's dislik of her had origin in jealousy , she could not help feel how unwelcom her appear at pemberley must be to her , and was cury to know with how much civil on that lady 's sid the acquaint would now be renew . on reach the hous , they wer shown through the hal into the saloon , whos northern aspect rend it delight for sum . it window op to the ground , admit a most refresh view of the high woody hil behind the hous , and of the beauty oak and span chestnut which wer scat ov the intermedy lawn . in thi hous they wer receiv by miss darcy , who was sit ther with mrs. hurst and miss bingley , and the lady with whom she liv in london . georgian 's receiv of them was very civil , but attend with al the embarrass which , though process from shy and the fear of doing wrong , would easy giv to thos who felt themselv infery the believ of her being proud and reserv . mrs. gardin and her niec , howev , did her just , and pity her . by mrs. hurst and miss bingley they wer not on by a curtsey ; and , on their being seat , a paus , awkward as such paus must alway be , success for a few mom . it was first brok by mrs. annesley , a genteel , agreeable-looking wom , whos endeavo to introduc som kind of discours prov her to be mor tru well-bred than eith of the oth ; and between her and mrs. gardin , with occas help from elizabe , the convers was carry on . miss darcy look as if she wish for cour enough to join in it ; and sometim did vent a short sent when ther was least dang of it being heard . elizabe soon saw that she was herself clos watch by miss bingley , and that she could not speak a word , espec to miss darcy , without cal her at . thi observ would not hav prev her from try to talk to the lat , had they not been seat at an inconveny dist ; but she was not sorry to be spar the necess of say much . her own thought wer employ her . she expect every mom that som of the gentlem would ent the room . she wish , she fear that the mast of the hous might be amongst them ; and wheth she wish or fear it most , she could scarc determin . aft sit in thi man a quart of an hour without hear miss bingley 's voic , elizabe was rous by receiv from her a cold inquiry aft the heal of her famy . she answ with eq indiff and brev , and the oth said no mor . the next vary which their visit afford was produc by the ent of serv with cold meat , cak , and a vary of al the finest fruit in season ; but thi did not tak plac til aft many a sign look and smil from mrs. annesley to miss darcy had been giv , to remind her of her post . ther was now employ for the whol party—for though they could not al talk , they could al eat ; and the beauty pyramid of grap , nectarin , and peach soon collect them round the tabl . whil thu eng , elizabe had a fair opportun of decid wheth she most fear or wish for the appear of mr. darcy , by the feel which prevail on his ent the room ; and then , though but a mom bef she had believ her wish to predomin , she beg to regret that he cam . he had been som tim with mr. gardin , who , with two or three oth gentlem from the hous , was eng by the riv , and had left him on on learn that the lady of the famy intend a visit to georgian that morn . no soon did he appear than elizabe wis resolv to be perfect easy and unembarrass ; a resolv the mor necess to be mad , but perhap not the mor easy kept , becaus she saw that the susp of the whol party wer awak against them , and that ther was scarc an ey which did not watch his behavio when he first cam into the room . in no count was at curios so strongly mark as in miss bingley 's , in spit of the smil which overspread her fac whenev she spok to on of it object ; for jealousy had not yet mad her desp , and her at to mr. darcy wer by no mean ov . miss darcy , on her broth 's ent , exert herself much mor to talk , and elizabe saw that he was anxy for his sist and herself to get acquaint , and forward as much as poss , every attempt at convers on eith sid . miss bingley saw al thi likew ; and , in the imprud of ang , took the first opportun of say , with sne civil : '' pray , miss eliz , ar not the ——shire milit remov from meryton ? they must be a gre loss to yo famy . '' in darcy 's pres she dar not ment wickham 's nam ; but elizabe inst comprehend that he was uppermost in her thought ; and the vary recollect connect with him gav her a mom 's distress ; but exert herself vig to repel the ill-natured attack , she pres answ the quest in a tol detach ton . whil she spok , an involunt glant show her darcy , with a height complect , earnest look at her , and his sist overcom with confus , and un to lift up her ey . had miss bingley known what pain she was then giv her belov friend , she undoubt would hav refrain from the hint ; but she had mer intend to discompos elizabe by bring forward the ide of a man to whom she believ her part , to mak her betray a sens which might ind her in darcy 's opin , and , perhap , to remind the lat of al the fol and absurd by which som part of her famy wer connect with that corp . not a syl had ev reach her of miss darcy 's medit elop . to no cre had it been rev , wher secrecy was poss , exceiv to elizabe ; and from al bingley 's connect her broth was particul anxy to cont it , from the very wish which elizabe had long ago attribut to him , of their becom hereaft her own . he had certain form such a plan , and without mean that it should affect his endeavo to sep him from miss bennet , it is prob that it might ad someth to his liv concern for the welf of his friend . elizabe 's collect behavio , howev , soon quiet his emot ; and as miss bingley , vex and disappoint , dar not approach near to wickham , georgian also recov in tim , though not enough to be abl to speak any mor . her broth , whos ey she fear to meet , scarc recollect her interest in the affair , and the very circumst which had been design to turn his thought from elizabe seem to hav fix them on her mor and mor che . their visit did not continu long aft the quest and answ abov ment ; and whil mr. darcy was attend them to their carry miss bingley was vent her feel in crit on elizabe 's person , behavio , and dress . but georgian would not join her . her broth 's recommend was enough to ens her favo ; his judg could not er . and he had spok in such term of elizabe as to leav georgian without the pow of find her otherw than lov and amy . when darcy return to the saloon , miss bingley could not help rep to him som part of what she had been say to his sist . `` how very il miss eliz bennet look thi morn , mr. darcy , '' she cri ; `` i nev in my lif saw anyon so much alt as she is sint the wint . she is grown so brown and coars ! louis and i wer agr that we should not hav known her again . '' howev littl mr. darcy might hav lik such an address , he cont himself with cool reply that he perceiv no oth alt than her being rath tan , no mirac consequ of travel in the sum . `` for my own part , '' she rejoin , `` i must confess that i nev could see any beauty in her . her fac is too thin ; her complect has no bril ; and her feat ar not at al handsom . her nos want character—there is noth mark in it lin . her tee ar tol , but not out of the common way ; and as for her ey , which hav sometim been cal so fin , i could nev see anyth extraordin in them . they hav a sharp , shrewish look , which i do not lik at al ; and in her air altogeth ther is a self-sufficiency without fash , which is intol . '' persuad as miss bingley was that darcy admir elizabe , thi was not the best method of recommend herself ; but angry peopl ar not alway wis ; and in see him at last look somewh nettl , she had al the success she expect . he was resolv sil , howev , and , from a determin of mak him speak , she continu : '' i rememb , when we first knew her in hertfordshir , how amaz we al wer to find that she was a reput beauty ; and i particul recollect yo say on night , aft they had been din at netherfield , 'she a beauty ! —i should as soon cal her moth a wit . ' but afterward she seem to improv on you , and i believ you thought her rath pretty at on tim . '' `` ye , '' reply darcy , who could contain himself no long , `` but that was on when i first saw her , for it is many month sint i hav consid her as on of the handsomest wom of my acquaint . '' he then went away , and miss bingley was left to al the satisfact of hav forc him to say what gav no on any pain but herself . mrs. gardin and elizabe talk of al that had occur dur their visit , as they return , exceiv what had particul interest them both . the look and behavio of everybody they had seen wer discuss , exceiv of the person who had most eng their at . they talk of his sist , his friend , his hous , his fruit—of everyth but himself ; yet elizabe was long to know what mrs. gardin thought of him , and mrs. gardin would hav been high grat by her niec 's begin the subject . chapt 46 elizabe had been a good deal disappoint in not find a let from jan on their first ar at lambton ; and thi disappoint had been renew on each of the morn that had now been spent ther ; but on the third her repin was ov , and her sist just , by the receipt of two let from her at ont , on on of which was mark that it had been miss elsewh . elizabe was not surpr at it , as jan had writ the direct remark il . they had just been prep to walk as the let cam in ; and her unc and aunt , leav her to enjoy them in quiet , set off by themselv . the on miss must first be attend to ; it had been writ fiv day ago . the begin contain an account of al their littl party and eng , with such new as the country afford ; but the lat half , which was dat a day lat , and writ in evid agit , gav mor import intellig . it was to thi effect : '' sint writ the abov , dearest lizzy , someth has occur of a most unexpect and sery nat ; but i am afraid of alarm you—be ass that we ar al wel . what i hav to say rel to poor lyd . an express cam at twelv last night , just as we wer al gon to bed , from colonel forst , to inform us that she was gon off to scotland with on of his off ; to own the tru , with wickham ! imagin our surpr . to kitty , howev , it doe not seem so whol unexpect . i am very , very sorry . so imprud a match on both sid ! but i am wil to hop the best , and that his charact has been misunderstood . thoughtless and indiscreet i can easy believ him , but thi step ( and let us rejo ov it ) mark noth bad at heart . his cho is disinterest at least , for he must know my fath can giv her noth . our poor moth is sad griev . my fath bear it bet . how thank am i that we nev let them know what has been said against him ; we must forget it ourselv . they wer off saturday night about twelv , as is conject , but wer not miss til yesterday morn at eight . the express was sent off direct . my dear lizzy , they must hav pass within ten mil of us . colonel forst giv us reason to expect him her soon . lyd left a few lin for his wif , inform her of their int . i must conclud , for i can not be long from my poor moth . i am afraid you wil not be abl to mak it out , but i hard know what i hav writ . '' without allow herself tim for consid , and scarc know what she felt , elizabe on fin thi let inst seiz the oth , and op it with the utmost impaty , read as follow : it had been writ a day lat than the conclud of the first . `` by thi tim , my dearest sist , you hav receiv my hurry let ; i wish thi may be mor intellig , but though not confin for tim , my head is so bewild that i can not answ for being coh . dearest lizzy , i hard know what i would writ , but i hav bad new for you , and it can not be delay . imprud as the marry between mr. wickham and our poor lyd would be , we ar now anxy to be ass it has tak plac , for ther is but too much reason to fear they ar not gon to scotland . colonel forst cam yesterday , hav left brighton the day bef , not many hour aft the express . though lyd 's short let to mrs. f. gav them to understand that they wer going to gretn green , someth was drop by denny express his believ that w. nev intend to go ther , or to marry lyd at al , which was rep to colonel f. , who , inst tak the alarm , set off from b. intend to trac their rout . he did trac them easy to clapham , but no furth ; for on ent that plac , they remov into a hackney coach , and dismiss the cha that brought them from epsom . al that is known aft thi is , that they wer seen to continu the london road . i know not what to think . aft mak every poss inquiry on that sid london , colonel f. cam on into hertfordshir , anxy renew them at al the turnpik , and at the in in barnet and hatfield , but without any success—no such peopl had been seen to pass through . with the kindest concern he cam on to longbourn , and brok his apprehend to us in a man most credit to his heart . i am sint griev for him and mrs. f. , but no on can throw any blam on them . our distress , my dear lizzy , is very gre . my fath and moth believ the worst , but i can not think so il of him . many circumst might mak it mor elig for them to be marry priv in town than to pursu their first plan ; and ev if he could form such a design against a young wom of lyd 's connect , which is not lik , can i suppos her so lost to everyth ? imposs ! i griev to find , howev , that colonel f. is not dispos to depend upon their marry ; he shook his head when i express my hop , and said he fear w. was not a man to be trust . my poor moth is real il , and keep her room . could she exert herself , it would be bet ; but thi is not to be expect . and as to my fath , i nev in my lif saw him so affect . poor kitty has ang for hav cont their attach ; but as it was a mat of confid , on can not wond . i am tru glad , dearest lizzy , that you hav been spar someth of thes distress scen ; but now , as the first shock is ov , shal i own that i long for yo return ? i am not so self , howev , as to press for it , if inconveny . adieu ! i tak up my pen again to do what i hav just told you i would not ; but circumst ar such that i can not help earnest beg you al to com her as soon as poss . i know my dear unc and aunt so wel , that i am not afraid of request it , though i hav stil someth mor to ask of the form . my fath is going to london with colonel forst inst , to try to discov her . what he mean to do i am sur i know not ; but his excess distress wil not allow him to pursu any meas in the best and safest way , and colonel forst is oblig to be at brighton again to-morrow ev . in such an exig , my unc 's adv and assist would be everyth in the world ; he wil immedy comprehend what i must feel , and i rely upon his good . '' `` oh ! wher , wher is my unc ? '' cri elizabe , dart from her seat as she fin the let , in eag to follow him , without los a mom of the tim so precy ; but as she reach the door it was op by a serv , and mr. darcy appear . her pal fac and impetu man mad him start , and bef he could recov himself to speak , she , in whos mind every ide was supers by lyd 's situ , hasty exclaim , `` i beg yo pardon , but i must leav you . i must find mr. gardin thi mom , on busy that can not be delay ; i hav not an inst to los . '' `` good god ! what is the mat ? '' cri he , with mor feel than polit ; then recollect himself , `` i wil not detain you a minut ; but let me , or let the serv go aft mr. and mrs. gardin . you ar not wel enough ; you can not go yourself . '' elizabe hesit , but her kne trembl und her and she felt how littl would be gain by her attempt to pursu them . cal back the serv , theref , she commit him , though in so breathless an acc as mad her almost unintellig , to fetch his mast and mistress hom inst . on his quit the room she sat down , un to support herself , and look so mis il , that it was imposs for darcy to leav her , or to refrain from say , in a ton of gentl and com , `` let me cal yo maid . is ther noth you could tak to giv you pres reliev ? a glass of win ; shal i get you on ? you ar very ill. '' '' no , i thank you , '' she reply , endeavo to recov herself . `` ther is noth the mat with me . i am quit wel ; i am on distress by som dread new which i hav just receiv from longbourn . '' she burst into tear as she allud to it , and for a few minut could not speak anoth word . darcy , in wretch suspens , could on say someth indistinct of his concern , and observ her in compass sil . at leng she spok again . `` i hav just had a let from jan , with such dread new . it can not be cont from anyon . my young sist has left al her friends—ha elop ; has thrown herself into the pow of—of mr. wickham . they ar gon off togeth from brighton . you know him too wel to doubt the rest . she has no money , no connect , noth that can tempt him to—she is lost for ev . '' darcy was fix in aston . `` when i consid , '' she ad in a yet mor agit voic , `` that i might hav prev it ! i , who knew what he was . had i but explain som part of it only—some part of what i learnt , to my own famy ! had his charact been known , thi could not hav hap . but it is all—al too lat now . '' `` i am griev indee , '' cri darcy ; `` grieved—shock . but is it certain—absolutely certain ? '' `` oh , ye ! they left brighton togeth on sunday night , and wer trac almost to london , but not beyond ; they ar certain not gon to scotland . '' `` and what has been don , what has been attempt , to recov her ? '' `` my fath is gon to london , and jan has writ to beg my unc 's immedy assist ; and we shal be off , i hop , in half-an-hour . but noth can be done—i know very wel that noth can be don . how is such a man to be work on ? how ar they ev to be discov ? i hav not the smallest hop . it is every way horr ! '' darcy shook his head in sil acquiesc . `` when my ey wer op to his real character—oh ! had i known what i ought , what i dar to do ! but i knew not—i was afraid of doing too much . wretch , wretch mistak ! '' darcy mad no answ . he seem scarc to hear her , and was walk up and down the room in earnest medit , his brow contract , his air gloom . elizabe soon observ , and inst understood it . her pow was sink ; everyth must sink und such a proof of famy weak , such an ass of the deepest disgrac . she could neith wond nor condemn , but the believ of his self-conquest brought noth consol to her bosom , afford no pal of her distress . it was , on the cont , exact calc to mak her understand her own wish ; and nev had she so honest felt that she could hav lov him , as now , when al lov must be vain . but self , though it would intrud , could not engross her . lydia—the humy , the misery she was bring on them al , soon swallow up every priv car ; and cov her fac with her handkerchief , elizabe was soon lost to everyth els ; and , aft a paus of sev minut , was on recal to a sens of her situ by the voic of her comp , who , in a man which , though it spok compass , spok likew restraint , said , `` i am afraid you hav been long desir my abs , nor hav i anyth to plead in excus of my stay , but real , though unavail concern . would to heav that anyth could be eith said or don on my part that might off consol to such distress ! but i wil not tor you with vain wish , which may seem purpos to ask for yo thank . thi unfortun affair wil , i fear , prev my sist 's hav the pleas of see you at pemberley to-day . '' `` oh , ye . be so kind as to apolog for us to miss darcy . say that urg busy cal us hom immedy . cont the unhappy tru as long as it is poss , i know it can not be long . '' he ready ass her of his secrecy ; again express his sorrow for her distress , wish it a happy conclud than ther was at pres reason to hop , and leav his comply for her rel , with on on sery , part look , went away . as he quit the room , elizabe felt how improb it was that they should ev see each oth again on such term of cord as had mark their sev meet in derbyshir ; and as she threw a retrospect glant ov the whol of their acquaint , so ful of contradict and vary , sigh at the pervers of thos feel which would now hav promot it continu , and would form hav rejo in it termin . if gratitud and esteem ar good found of affect , elizabe 's chang of senty wil be neith improb nor faul . but if otherwise—if regard springing from such sourc is unreason or un , in comparison of what is so oft describ as ar on a first interview with it object , and ev bef two word hav been exchang , noth can be said in her def , exceiv that she had giv somewh of a tri to the lat method in her part for wickham , and that it il success might , perhap , auth her to seek the oth less interest mod of attach . be that as it may , she saw him go with regret ; and in thi ear exampl of what lyd 's infamy must produc , found addit anct as she reflect on that wretch busy . nev , sint read jan 's second let , had she entertain a hop of wickham 's mean to marry her . no on but jan , she thought , could flat herself with such an expect . surpr was the least of her feel on thi develop . whil the cont of the first let remain in her mind , she was al surprise—all aston that wickham should marry a girl whom it was imposs he could marry for money ; and how lyd could ev hav attach him had appear incomprehens . but now it was al too nat . for such an attach as thi she might hav sufficy charm ; and though she did not suppos lyd to be delib eng in an elop without the int of marry , she had no difficul in believ that neith her virtu nor her understand would preserv her from fal an easy prey . she had nev perceiv , whil the regy was in hertfordshir , that lyd had any part for him ; but she was convint that lyd want on enco to attach herself to anybody . sometim on off , sometim anoth , had been her favourit , as their at rais them in her opin . her affect had contin been fluctu but nev without an object . the mischief of neglect and mistak indulg toward such a girl—oh ! how acut did she now feel it ! she was wild to be at home—to hear , to see , to be upon the spot to shar with jan in the car that must now fal whol upon her , in a famy so derang , a fath abs , a moth incap of exert , and requir const attend ; and though almost persuad that noth could be don for lyd , her unc 's interf seem of the utmost import , and til he ent the room her impaty was sev . mr. and mrs. gardin had hurry back in alarm , suppos by the serv 's account that their niec was tak sud il ; but satisfy them inst on that head , she eag commun the caus of their summon , read the two let aloud , and dwel on the postscrib of the last with trembl energy.— though lyd had nev been a favourit with them , mr. and mrs. gardin could not but be deeply afflict . not lyd on , but al wer concern in it ; and aft the first exclam of surpr and hor , mr. gardin prom every assist in his pow . elizabe , though expect no less , thank him with tear of gratitud ; and al three being actu by on spirit , everyth rel to their journey was speedy settl . they wer to be off as soon as poss . `` but what is to be don about pemberley ? '' cri mrs. gardin . `` john told us mr. darcy was her when you sent for us ; was it so ? '' `` ye ; and i told him we should not be abl to keep our eng . that is al settl . '' `` what is al settl ? '' rep the oth , as she ran into her room to prep . `` and ar they upon such term as for her to disclos the real tru ? oh , that i knew how it was ! '' but wish wer vain , or at least could on serv to amus her in the hurry and confus of the follow hour . had elizabe been at leis to be idl , she would hav remain certain that al employ was imposs to on so wretch as herself ; but she had her shar of busy as wel as her aunt , and amongst the rest ther wer not to be writ to al their friend at lambton , with fals excus for their sud depart . an hour , howev , saw the whol complet ; and mr. gardin meanwhil hav settl his account at the in , noth remain to be don but to go ; and elizabe , aft al the misery of the morn , found herself , in a short spac of tim than she could hav suppos , seat in the carry , and on the road to longbourn . chapt 47 '' i hav been think it ov again , elizabe , '' said her unc , as they drov from the town ; `` and real , upon sery consid , i am much mor inclin than i was to judg as yo eldest sist doe on the mat . it appear to me so very unlik that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no mean unprotect or friendless , and who was act stay in his colonel 's famy , that i am strongly inclin to hop the best . could he expect that her friend would not step forward ? could he expect to be not again by the regy , aft such an affront to colonel forst ? his tempt is not adequ to the risk ! '' `` do you real think so ? '' cri elizabe , bright up for a mom . `` upon my word , '' said mrs. gardin , `` i begin to be of yo unc 's opin . it is real too gre a viol of dec , hono , and interest , for him to be guil of . i can not think so very il of wickham . can you yourself , lizzy , so whol giv him up , as to believ him cap of it ? '' `` not , perhap , of neglect his own interest ; but of every oth neglect i can believ him cap . if , indee , it should be so ! but i dar not hop it . why should they not go on to scotland if that had been the cas ? '' `` in the first plac , '' reply mr. gardin , `` ther is no absolv proof that they ar not gon to scotland . '' `` oh ! but their remov from the cha into a hackney coach is such a presum ! and , besid , no trac of them wer to be found on the barnet road . '' `` wel , then—supposing them to be in london . they may be ther , though for the purpos of cont , for no mor exceiv purpos . it is not lik that money should be very abund on eith sid ; and it might strike them that they could be mor econom , though less exp , marry in london than in scotland . '' `` but why al thi secrecy ? why any fear of detect ? why must their marry be priv ? oh , no , no—this is not lik . his most particul friend , you see by jan 's account , was persuad of his nev intend to marry her . wickham wil nev marry a wom without som money . he can not afford it . and what claim has lydia—what attract has she beyond you , heal , and good humo that could mak him , for her sak , forego every chant of benefit himself by marry wel ? as to what restraint the apprehend of disgrac in the corp might throw on a dishono elop with her , i am not abl to judg ; for i know noth of the effect that such a step might produc . but as to yo oth object , i am afraid it wil hard hold good . lyd has no broth to step forward ; and he might imagin , from my fath 's behavio , from his indol and the littl at he has ev seem to giv to what was going forward in his famy , that he would do as littl , and think as littl about it , as any fath could do , in such a mat . '' `` but can you think that lyd is so lost to everyth but lov of him as to cons to liv with him on any term oth than marry ? '' `` it doe seem , and it is most shock indee , '' reply elizabe , with tear in her ey , `` that a sist 's sens of dec and virtu in such a point should admit of doubt . but , real , i know not what to say . perhap i am not doing her just . but she is very young ; she has nev been taught to think on sery subject ; and for the last half-year , nay , for a twelvemonth—she has been giv up to noth but amus and van . she has been allow to dispos of her tim in the most idl and frivol man , and to adopt any opin that cam in her way . sint the ——shire wer first quart in meryton , noth but lov , flirt , and off hav been in her head . she has been doing everyth in her pow by think and talk on the subject , to giv greater—what shal i cal it ? suscept to her feel ; which ar nat liv enough . and we al know that wickham has every charm of person and address that can capt a wom . '' `` but you see that jan , '' said her aunt , `` doe not think so very il of wickham as to believ him cap of the attempt . '' `` of whom doe jan ev think il ? and who is ther , whatev might be their form conduc , that she would think cap of such an attempt , til it wer prov against them ? but jan know , as wel as i do , what wickham real is . we both know that he has been proflig in every sens of the word ; that he has neith integr nor hono ; that he is as fals and deceit as he is insinu . '' `` and do you real know al thi ? '' cri mrs. gardin , whos curios as to the mod of her intellig was al al . `` i do indee , '' reply elizabe , colo . `` i told you , the oth day , of his infam behavio to mr. darcy ; and you yourself , when last at longbourn , heard in what man he spok of the man who had behav with such forbear and lib toward him . and ther ar oth circumst which i am not at liberty—which it is not wor whil to rel ; but his lie about the whol pemberley famy ar endless . from what he said of miss darcy i was thorough prep to see a proud , reserv , disagr girl . yet he knew to the cont himself . he must know that she was as amy and unpretend as we hav found her . '' `` but doe lyd know noth of thi ? can she be ign of what you and jan seem so wel to understand ? '' `` oh , ye ! —that , that is the worst of al . til i was in kent , and saw so much both of mr. darcy and his rel colonel fitzwilliam , i was ign of the tru myself . and when i return hom , the ——shire was to leav meryton in a week or fortnight 's tim . as that was the cas , neith jan , to whom i rel the whol , nor i , thought it necess to mak our knowledg publ ; for of what us could it app be to any on , that the good opin which al the neighbo had of him should then be overthrown ? and ev when it was settl that lyd should go with mrs. forst , the necess of op her ey to his charact nev occur to me . that she could be in any dang from the deceiv nev ent my head . that such a consequ as thi could ensu , you may easy believ , was far enough from my thought . '' `` when they al remov to brighton , theref , you had no reason , i suppos , to believ them fond of each oth ? '' `` not the slightest . i can rememb no symptom of affect on eith sid ; and had anyth of the kind been percept , you must be aw that our is not a famy on which it could be thrown away . when first he ent the corp , she was ready enough to admir him ; but so we al wer . every girl in or near meryton was out of her sens about him for the first two month ; but he nev distinct her by any particul at ; and , consequ , aft a mod period of extrav and wild admir , her fant for him gav way , and oth of the regy , who tre her with mor distinct , again becam her favourit . '' it may be easy believ , that howev littl of novel could be ad to their fear , hop , and conject , on thi interest subject , by it rep discuss , no oth could detain them from it long , dur the whol of the journey . from elizabe 's thought it was nev abs . fix ther by the keenest of al anct , self-reproach , she could find no interv of eas or forget . they travel as exp as poss , and , sleep on night on the road , reach longbourn by din tim the next day . it was a comfort to elizabe to consid that jan could not hav been weary by long expect . the littl gardin , attract by the sight of a cha , wer stand on the step of the hous as they ent the paddock ; and , when the carry drov up to the door , the joy surpr that light up their fac , and display itself ov their whol body , in a vary of cap and frisk , was the first pleas earnest of their welcom . elizabe jump out ; and , aft giv each of them a hasty kiss , hurry into the vestib , wher jan , who cam run down from her moth 's apart , immedy met her . elizabe , as she affect embrac her , whilst tear fil the ey of both , lost not a mom in ask wheth anyth had been heard of the fugit . `` not yet , '' reply jan . `` but now that my dear unc is com , i hop everyth wil be wel . '' `` is my fath in town ? '' `` ye , he went on tuesday , as i wrot you word . '' `` and hav you heard from him oft ? '' `` we hav heard on twic . he wrot me a few lin on wednesday to say that he had ar in saf , and to giv me his direct , which i particul beg him to do . he mer ad that he should not writ again til he had someth of import to ment . '' `` and my mother—how is she ? how ar you al ? '' `` my moth is tol wel , i trust ; though her spirit ar gre shak . she is up stair and wil hav gre satisfact in see you al . she doe not yet leav her dressing-room . mary and kitty , thank heav , ar quit wel . '' `` but you—how ar you ? '' cri elizabe . `` you look pal . how much you must hav gon through ! '' her sist , howev , ass her of her being perfect wel ; and their convers , which had been pass whil mr. and mrs. gardin wer eng with their childr , was now put an end to by the approach of the whol party . jan ran to her unc and aunt , and welcom and thank them both , with altern smil and tear . when they wer al in the drawing-room , the quest which elizabe had already ask wer of cours rep by the oth , and they soon found that jan had no intellig to giv . the sanguin hop of good , howev , which the benevol of her heart suggest had not yet desert her ; she stil expect that it would al end wel , and that every morn would bring som let , eith from lyd or her fath , to explain their process , and , perhap , annount their marry . mrs. bennet , to whos apart they al repair , aft a few minut ' convers togeth , receiv them exact as might be expect ; with tear and lam of regret , invect against the villain conduc of wickham , and complaint of her own suff and ill-usage ; blam everybody but the person to whos ill-judging indulg the er of her daught must princip be ow . `` if i had been abl , '' said she , `` to carry my point in going to brighton , with al my famy , thi would not hav hap ; but poor dear lyd had nobody to tak car of her . why did the forst ev let her go out of their sight ? i am sur ther was som gre neglect or oth on their sid , for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been wel look aft . i alway thought they wer very unfit to hav the charg of her ; but i was overr , as i alway am . poor dear child ! and now her 's mr. bennet gon away , and i know he wil fight wickham , wherev he meet him and then he wil be kil , and what is to becom of us al ? the collins wil turn us out bef he is cold in his grav , and if you ar not kind to us , broth , i do not know what we shal do . '' they al exclaim against such ter idea ; and mr. gardin , aft gen ass of his affect for her and al her famy , told her that he meant to be in london the very next day , and would assist mr. bennet in every endeavo for recov lyd . `` do not giv way to useless alarm , '' ad he ; `` though it is right to be prep for the worst , ther is no occas to look on it as certain . it is not quit a week sint they left brighton . in a few day mor we may gain som new of them ; and til we know that they ar not marry , and hav no design of marry , do not let us giv the mat ov as lost . as soon as i get to town i shal go to my broth , and mak him com hom with me to gracechurch street ; and then we may consult togeth as to what is to be don . '' `` oh ! my dear broth , '' reply mrs. bennet , `` that is exact what i could most wish for . and now do , when you get to town , find them out , wherev they may be ; and if they ar not marry already , mak them marry . and as for wed cloth , do not let them wait for that , but tel lyd she shal hav as much money as she choos to buy them , aft they ar marry . and , abov al , keep mr. bennet from fight . tel him what a dread stat i am in , that i am fright out of my wits—and hav such trembl , such flut , al ov me—such spasm in my sid and pain in my head , and such beat at heart , that i can get no rest by night nor by day . and tel my dear lyd not to giv any direct about her cloth til she has seen me , for she doe not know which ar the best wareh . oh , broth , how kind you ar ! i know you wil cont it al . '' but mr. gardin , though he ass her again of his earnest endeavo in the caus , could not avoid recommend mod to her , as wel in her hop as her fear ; and aft talk with her in thi man til din was on the tabl , they al left her to vent al her feel on the housekeep , who attend in the abs of her daught . though her broth and sist wer persuad that ther was no real occas for such a seclud from the famy , they did not attempt to oppos it , for they knew that she had not prud enough to hold her tongu bef the serv , whil they wait at tabl , and judg it bet that on on of the household , and the on whom they could most trust should comprehend al her fear and solicitud on the subject . in the dining-room they wer soon join by mary and kitty , who had been too busy eng in their sep apart to mak their appear bef . on cam from her book , and the oth from her toilet . the fac of both , howev , wer tol calm ; and no chang was vis in eith , exceiv that the loss of her favourit sist , or the ang which she had herself incur in thi busy , had giv mor of fret than us to the acc of kitty . as for mary , she was mistress enough of herself to whisp to elizabe , with a count of grav reflect , soon aft they wer seat at tabl : '' thi is a most unfortun affair , and wil prob be much talk of . but we must stem the tid of mal , and pour into the wound bosom of each oth the balm of sist consol . '' then , perceiv in elizabe no inclin of reply , she ad , `` unhappy as the ev must be for lyd , we may draw from it thi us lesson : that loss of virtu in a fem is irretriev ; that on fals step involv her in endless ruin ; that her reput is no less brittl than it is beauty ; and that she can not be too much guard in her behavio toward the undeserv of the oth sex . '' elizabe lift up her ey in amaz , but was too much oppress to mak any reply . mary , howev , continu to consol herself with such kind of mor extract from the evil bef them . in the afternoon , the two eld miss bennet wer abl to be for half-an-hour by themselv ; and elizabe inst avail herself of the opportun of mak any inquiry , which jan was eq eag to satisfy . aft join in gen lam ov the dread sequel of thi ev , which elizabe consid as al but certain , and miss bennet could not assert to be whol imposs , the form continu the subject , by say , `` but tel me al and everyth about it which i hav not already heard . giv me furth particul . what did colonel forst say ? had they no apprehend of anyth bef the elop took plac ? they must hav seen them togeth for ev . '' `` colonel forst did own that he had oft suspect som part , espec on lyd 's sid , but noth to giv him any alarm . i am so griev for him ! his behavio was at and kind to the utmost . he was com to us , in ord to ass us of his concern , bef he had any ide of their not being gon to scotland : when that apprehend first got abroad , it hast his journey . '' `` and was denny convint that wickham would not marry ? did he know of their intend to go off ? had colonel forst seen denny himself ? '' `` ye ; but , when quest by him , denny deny know anyth of their plan , and would not giv his real opin about it . he did not rep his persuas of their not marrying—and from that , i am inclin to hop , he might hav been misunderstood bef . '' `` and til colonel forst cam himself , not on of you entertain a doubt , i suppos , of their being real marry ? '' `` how was it poss that such an ide should ent our brain ? i felt a littl uneasy—a littl fear of my sist 's happy with him in marry , becaus i knew that his conduc had not been alway quit right . my fath and moth knew noth of that ; they on felt how imprud a match it must be . kitty then own , with a very nat triumph on know mor than the rest of us , that in lyd 's last let she had prep her for such a step . she had known , it seem , of their being in lov with each oth , many week . '' `` but not bef they went to brighton ? '' `` no , i believ not . '' `` and did colonel forst appear to think wel of wickham himself ? doe he know his real charact ? '' `` i must confess that he did not speak so wel of wickham as he form did . he believ him to be imprud and extrav . and sint thi sad affair has tak plac , it is said that he left meryton gre in debt ; but i hop thi may be fals . '' `` oh , jan , had we been less secret , had we told what we knew of him , thi could not hav hap ! '' `` perhap it would hav been bet , '' reply her sist . `` but to expos the form fault of any person without know what their pres feel wer , seem unjust . we act with the best int . '' `` could colonel forst rep the particul of lyd 's not to his wif ? '' `` he brought it with him for us to see . '' jan then took it from her pocket-book , and gav it to elizabe . thes wer the cont : '' my dear harriet , '' you wil laugh when you know wher i am gon , and i can not help laugh myself at yo surpr to-morrow morn , as soon as i am miss . i am going to gretn green , and if you can not guess with who , i shal think you a simpleton , for ther is but on man in the world i lov , and he is an angel . i should nev be happy without him , so think it no harm to be off . you nee not send them word at longbourn of my going , if you do not lik it , for it wil mak the surpr the gre , when i writ to them and sign my nam 'lydia wickham . ' what a good jok it wil be ! i can hard writ for laugh . pray mak my excus to prat for not keep my eng , and dant with him to-night . tel him i hop he wil excus me when he know al ; and tel him i wil dant with him at the next bal we meet , with gre pleas . i shal send for my cloth when i get to longbourn ; but i wish you would tel sal to mend a gre slit in my work muslin gown bef they ar pack up . good-bye . giv my lov to colonel forst . i hop you wil drink to our good journey . `` yo affect friend , '' lyd bennet . '' `` oh ! thoughtless , thoughtless lyd ! '' cri elizabe when she had fin it . `` what a let is thi , to be writ at such a mom ! but at least it show that she was sery on the subject of their journey . whatev he might afterward persuad her to , it was not on her sid a scheme of infamy . my poor fath ! how he must hav felt it ! '' `` i nev saw anyon so shock . he could not speak a word for ful ten minut . my moth was tak il immedy , and the whol hous in such confus ! '' `` oh ! jan , '' cri elizabe , `` was ther a serv belong to it who did not know the whol story bef the end of the day ? '' `` i do not know . i hop ther was . but to be guard at such a tim is very difficult . my moth was in hyst , and though i endeavo to giv her every assist in my pow , i am afraid i did not do so much as i might hav don ! but the hor of what might poss hap almost took from me my facul . '' `` yo attend upon her has been too much for you . you do not look wel . oh that i had been with you ! you hav had every car and anxy upon yourself alon . '' `` mary and kitty hav been very kind , and would hav shar in every fatigu , i am sur ; but i did not think it right for eith of them . kitty is slight and del ; and mary study so much , that her hour of repos should not be brok in on . my aunt phillip cam to longbourn on tuesday , aft my fath went away ; and was so good as to stay til thursday with me . she was of gre us and comfort to us al . and lady luca has been very kind ; she walk her on wednesday morn to condol with us , and off her serv , or any of her daught ' , if they should be of us to us . '' `` she had bet hav stay at hom , '' cri elizabe ; `` perhap she meant wel , but , und such a misfortun as thi , on can not see too littl of on 's neighbo . assist is imposs ; condol insuff . let them triumph ov us at a dist , and be satisfy . '' she then process to inquir into the meas which her fath had intend to pursu , whil in town , for the recovery of his daught . `` he meant i believ , '' reply jan , `` to go to epsom , the plac wher they last chang hors , see the postil and try if anyth could be mad out from them . his princip object must be to discov the numb of the hackney coach which took them from clapham . it had com with a far from london ; and as he thought that the circumst of a gentlem and lady 's remov from on carry into anoth might be remark he meant to mak inquiry at clapham . if he could anyhow discov at what hous the coachm had bef set down his far , he determin to mak inquiry ther , and hop it might not be imposs to find out the stand and numb of the coach . i do not know of any oth design that he had form ; but he was in such a hurry to be gon , and his spirit so gre discompos , that i had difficul in find out ev so much as thi . '' chapt 48 the whol party wer in hop of a let from mr. bennet the next morn , but the post cam in without bring a singl lin from him . his famy knew him to be , on al common occas , a most neglig and dil correspond ; but at such a tim they had hop for exert . they wer forc to conclud that he had no pleas intellig to send ; but ev of that they would hav been glad to be certain . mr. gardin had wait on for the let bef he set off . when he was gon , they wer certain at least of receiv const inform of what was going on , and their unc prom , at part , to prevail on mr. bennet to return to longbourn , as soon as he could , to the gre consol of his sist , who consid it as the on sec for her husband 's not being kil in a duel . mrs. gardin and the childr wer to remain in hertfordshir a few day long , as the form thought her pres might be serv to her niec . she shar in their attend on mrs. bennet , and was a gre comfort to them in their hour of freedom . their oth aunt also visit them frequ , and alway , as she said , with the design of che and heart them up—though , as she nev cam without report som fresh inst of wickham 's extrav or irregul , she seldom went away without leav them mor dispirit than she found them . al meryton seem striving to black the man who , but three month bef , had been almost an angel of light . he was decl to be in debt to every tradesm in the plac , and his intrigu , al hono with the titl of seduc , had been extend into every tradesm 's famy . everybody decl that he was the wickedest young man in the world ; and everybody beg to find out that they had alway distrust the appear of his good . elizabe , though she did not credit abov half of what was said , believ enough to mak her form ass of her sist 's ruin mor certain ; and ev jan , who believ stil less of it , becam almost hopeless , mor espec as the tim was now com when , if they had gon to scotland , which she had nev bef entir despair of , they must in al prob hav gain som new of them . mr. gardin left longbourn on sunday ; on tuesday his wif receiv a let from him ; it told them that , on his ar , he had immedy found out his broth , and persuad him to com to gracechurch street ; that mr. bennet had been to epsom and clapham , bef his ar , but without gain any satisfact inform ; and that he was now determin to inquir at al the princip hotel in town , as mr. bennet thought it poss they might hav gon to on of them , on their first com to london , bef they proc lodg . mr. gardin himself did not expect any success from thi meas , but as his broth was eag in it , he meant to assist him in pursu it . he ad that mr. bennet seem whol disinclin at pres to leav london and prom to writ again very soon . ther was also a postscrib to thi effect : '' i hav writ to colonel forst to desir him to find out , if poss , from som of the young man 's intim in the regy , wheth wickham has any rel or connect who would be lik to know in what part of town he has now cont himself . if ther wer anyon that on could apply to with a prob of gain such a clu as that , it might be of ess consequ . at pres we hav noth to guid us . colonel forst wil , i dar say , do everyth in his pow to satisfy us on thi head . but , on second thought , perhap , lizzy could tel us what rel he has now liv , bet than any oth person . '' elizabe was at no loss to understand from whent thi def to her auth process ; but it was not in her pow to giv any inform of so satisfact a nat as the comply deserv . she had nev heard of his hav had any rel , exceiv a fath and moth , both of whom had been dead many year . it was poss , howev , that som of his comp in the ——shire might be abl to giv mor inform ; and though she was not very sanguin in expect it , the apply was a someth to look forward to . every day at longbourn was now a day of anxy ; but the most anxy part of each was when the post was expect . the ar of let was the grand object of every morn 's impaty . through let , whatev of good or bad was to be told would be commun , and every success day was expect to bring som new of import . but bef they heard again from mr. gardin , a let ar for their fath , from a diff quart , from mr. collin ; which , as jan had receiv direct to op al that cam for him in his abs , she accord read ; and elizabe , who knew what curios his let alway wer , look ov her , and read it likew . it was as follow : '' my dear sir , '' i feel myself cal upon , by our rel , and my situ in lif , to condol with you on the griev afflict you ar now suff und , of which we wer yesterday inform by a let from hertfordshir . be ass , my dear sir , that mrs. collin and myself sint sympath with you and al yo respect famy , in yo pres distress , which must be of the bitterest kind , becaus process from a caus which no tim can remov . no argu shal be want on my part that can allevy so sev a misfortune—or that may comfort you , und a circumst that must be of al oth the most afflict to a par 's mind . the dea of yo daught would hav been a bless in comparison of thi . and it is the mor to be lam , becaus ther is reason to suppos as my dear charlot inform me , that thi licenty of behavio in yo daught has process from a faul degr of indulg ; though , at the sam tim , for the consol of yourself and mrs. bennet , i am inclin to think that her own disposit must be nat bad , or she could not be guil of such an enorm , at so ear an ag . howsoev that may be , you ar griev to be pity ; in which opin i am not on join by mrs. collin , but likew by lady catherin and her daught , to whom i hav rel the affair . they agr with me in apprehend that thi fals step in on daught wil be injury to the fortun of al the oth ; for who , as lady catherin herself condescend say , wil connect themselv with such a famy ? and thi consid lead me moreov to reflect , with aug satisfact , on a certain ev of last novemb ; for had it been otherw , i must hav been involv in al yo sorrow and disgrac . let me then adv you , dear sir , to consol yourself as much as poss , to throw off yo unworthy child from yo affect for ev , and leav her to reap the fruit of her own hein offens . `` i am , dear sir , etc. , etc . '' mr. gardin did not writ again til he had receiv an answ from colonel forst ; and then he had noth of a pleas nat to send . it was not known that wickham had a singl rel with whom he kept up any connect , and it was certain that he had no near on liv . his form acquaint had been num ; but sint he had been in the milit , it did not appear that he was on term of particul friend with any of them . ther was no on , theref , who could be point out as lik to giv any new of him . and in the wretch stat of his own fin , ther was a very pow mot for secrecy , in addit to his fear of discovery by lyd 's rel , for it had just transpir that he had left gam debt behind him to a very consid amount . colonel forst believ that mor than a thousand pound would be necess to clear his expens at brighton . he ow a good deal in town , but his debt of hono wer stil mor formid . mr. gardin did not attempt to cont thes particul from the longbourn famy . jan heard them with hor . `` a gamest ! '' she cri . `` thi is whol unexpect . i had not an ide of it . '' mr. gardin ad in his let , that they might expect to see their fath at hom on the follow day , which was saturday . rend spiritless by the ill-success of al their endeavo , he had yield to his brother-in-law 's entreaty that he would return to his famy , and leav it to him to do whatev occas might suggest to be adv for continu their pursuit . when mrs. bennet was told of thi , she did not express so much satisfact as her childr expect , consid what her anxy for his lif had been bef . `` what , is he com hom , and without poor lyd ? '' she cri . `` sur he wil not leav london bef he has found them . who is to fight wickham , and mak him marry her , if he com away ? '' as mrs. gardin beg to wish to be at hom , it was settl that she and the childr should go to london , at the sam tim that mr. bennet cam from it . the coach , theref , took them the first stag of their journey , and brought it mast back to longbourn . mrs. gardin went away in al the perplex about elizabe and her derbyshir friend that had attend her from that part of the world . his nam had nev been volunt ment bef them by her niec ; and the kind of half-expectation which mrs. gardin had form , of their being follow by a let from him , had end in noth . elizabe had receiv non sint her return that could com from pemberley . the pres unhappy stat of the famy rend any oth excus for the low of her spirit unnecess ; noth , theref , could be fair conject from that , though elizabe , who was by thi tim tol wel acquaint with her own feel , was perfect aw that , had she known noth of darcy , she could hav born the dread of lyd 's infamy somewh bet . it would hav spar her , she thought , on sleepless night out of two . when mr. bennet ar , he had al the appear of his us philosoph compos . he said as littl as he had ev been in the habit of say ; mad no ment of the busy that had tak him away , and it was som tim bef his daught had cour to speak of it . it was not til the afternoon , when he had join them at tea , that elizabe vent to introduc the subject ; and then , on her brief express her sorrow for what he must hav end , he reply , `` say noth of that . who should suff but myself ? it has been my own doing , and i ought to feel it . '' `` you must not be too sev upon yourself , '' reply elizabe . `` you may wel warn me against such an evil . hum nat is so pron to fal into it ! no , lizzy , let me ont in my lif feel how much i hav been to blam . i am not afraid of being overpow by the impress . it wil pass away soon enough . '' `` do you suppos them to be in london ? '' `` ye ; wher els can they be so wel cont ? '' `` and lyd us to want to go to london , '' ad kitty . `` she is happy then , '' said her fath dri ; `` and her resid ther wil prob be of som dur . '' then aft a short sil he continu : '' lizzy , i bear you no ill-wil for being just in yo adv to me last may , which , consid the ev , show som gre of mind . '' they wer interrupt by miss bennet , who cam to fetch her moth 's tea . `` thi is a parad , '' he cri , `` which doe on good ; it giv such an eleg to misfortun ! anoth day i wil do the sam ; i wil sit in my libr , in my nightcap and powd gown , and giv as much troubl as i can ; or , perhap , i may def it til kitty run away . '' `` i am not going to run away , pap , '' said kitty fret . `` if i should ev go to brighton , i would behav bet than lyd . '' `` you go to brighton . i would not trust you so near it as eastbourn for fifty pound ! no , kitty , i hav at last learnt to be cauty , and you wil feel the effect of it . no off is ev to ent into my hous again , nor ev to pass through the vil . bal wil be absolv prohibit , unless you stand up with on of yo sist . and you ar nev to stir out of door til you can prov that you hav spent ten minut of every day in a rat man . '' kitty , who took al thes threats in a sery light , beg to cry . `` wel , wel , '' said he , `` do not mak yourself unhappy . if you ar a good girl for the next ten year , i wil tak you to a review at the end of them . '' chapt 49 two day aft mr. bennet 's return , as jan and elizabe wer walk togeth in the shrubbery behind the hous , they saw the housekeep com toward them , and , conclud that she cam to cal them to their moth , went forward to meet her ; but , instead of the expect summon , when they approach her , she said to miss bennet , `` i beg yo pardon , madam , for interrupt you , but i was in hop you might hav got som good new from town , so i took the liberty of com to ask . '' `` what do you mean , hil ? we hav heard noth from town . '' `` dear madam , '' cri mrs. hil , in gre aston , `` do n't you know ther is an express com for mast from mr. gardin ? he has been her thi half-hour , and mast has had a let . '' away ran the girl , too eag to get in to hav tim for speech . they ran through the vestib into the breakfast-room ; from thent to the libr ; their fath was in neith ; and they wer on the point of seek him up stair with their moth , when they wer met by the butl , who said : '' if you ar look for my mast , ma'am , he is walk toward the littl cops . '' upon thi inform , they inst pass through the hal ont mor , and ran across the lawn aft their fath , who was delib pursu his way toward a smal wood on on sid of the paddock . jan , who was not so light nor so much in the habit of run as elizabe , soon lag behind , whil her sist , pant for brea , cam up with him , and eag cri out : '' oh , pap , what news—what new ? hav you heard from my unc ? '' `` ye i hav had a let from him by express . '' `` wel , and what new doe it bring—good or bad ? '' `` what is ther of good to be expect ? '' said he , tak the let from his pocket . `` but perhap you would lik to read it . '' elizabe impaty caught it from his hand . jan now cam up . `` read it aloud , '' said their fath , `` for i hard know myself what it is about . '' `` gracechurch street , monday , august 2 . `` my dear broth , '' at last i am abl to send you som tid of my niec , and such as , upon the whol , i hop it wil giv you satisfact . soon aft you left me on saturday , i was fortun enough to find out in what part of london they wer . the particul i reserv til we meet ; it is enough to know they ar discov . i hav seen them both— '' '' then it is as i alway hop , '' cri jan ; `` they ar marry ! '' elizabe read on : '' i hav seen them both . they ar not marry , nor can i find ther was any int of being so ; but if you ar wil to perform the eng which i hav vent to mak on yo sid , i hop it wil not be long bef they ar . al that is requir of you is , to ass to yo daught , by settl , her eq shar of the fiv thousand pound sec among yo childr aft the deceas of yourself and my sist ; and , moreov , to ent into an eng of allow her , dur yo lif , on hundr pound per ann . thes ar condit which , consid everyth , i had no hesit in comply with , as far as i thought myself privileg , for you . i shal send thi by express , that no tim may be lost in bring me yo answ . you wil easy comprehend , from thes particul , that mr. wickham 's circumst ar not so hopeless as they ar gen believ to be . the world has been deceiv in that respect ; and i am happy to say ther wil be som littl money , ev when al his debt ar discharg , to settl on my niec , in addit to her own fortun . if , as i conclud wil be the cas , you send me ful pow to act in yo nam throughout the whol of thi busy , i wil immedy giv direct to haggerston for prep a prop settl . ther wil not be the smallest occas for yo com to town again ; theref stay quiet at longbourn , and depend on my dilig and car . send back yo answ as fast as you can , and be car to writ explicit . we hav judg it best that my niec should be marry from thi hous , of which i hop you wil approv . she com to us to-day . i shal writ again as soon as anyth mor is determin on . yo , etc. , '' edw . gardin . '' `` is it poss ? '' cri elizabe , when she had fin . `` can it be poss that he wil marry her ? '' `` wickham is not so undeserv , then , as we thought him , '' said her sist . `` my dear fath , i congrat you . '' `` and hav you answ the let ? '' cri elizabe . `` no ; but it must be don soon . '' most earnest did she then entreaty him to los no mor tim bef he wrot . `` oh ! my dear fath , '' she cri , `` com back and writ immedy . consid how import every mom is in such a cas . '' `` let me writ for you , '' said jan , `` if you dislik the troubl yourself . '' `` i dislik it very much , '' he reply ; `` but it must be don . '' and so say , he turn back with them , and walk toward the hous . `` and may i ask— '' said elizabe ; `` but the term , i suppos , must be comply with . '' `` comply with ! i am on asham of his ask so littl . '' `` and they must marry ! yet he is such a man ! '' `` ye , ye , they must marry . ther is noth els to be don . but ther ar two thing that i want very much to know ; on is , how much money yo unc has laid down to bring it about ; and the oth , how am i ev to pay him . '' `` money ! my unc ! '' cri jan , `` what do you mean , sir ? '' `` i mean , that no man in his sens would marry lyd on so slight a tempt as on hundr a year dur my lif , and fifty aft i am gon . '' `` that is very tru , '' said elizabe ; `` though it had not occur to me bef . his debt to be discharg , and someth stil to remain ! oh ! it must be my unc 's doing ! gen , good man , i am afraid he has distress himself . a smal sum could not do al thi . '' `` no , '' said her fath ; `` wickham 's a fool if he tak her with a farth less than ten thousand pound . i should be sorry to think so il of him , in the very begin of our rel . '' `` ten thousand pound ! heav forbid ! how is half such a sum to be repaid ? '' mr. bennet mad no answ , and each of them , deep in thought , continu sil til they reach the hous . their fath then went on to the libr to writ , and the girl walk into the breakfast-room . `` and they ar real to be marry ! '' cri elizabe , as soon as they wer by themselv . `` how strange thi is ! and for thi we ar to be thank . that they should marry , smal as is their chant of happy , and wretch as is his charact , we ar forc to rejo . oh , lyd ! '' `` i comfort myself with think , '' reply jan , `` that he certain would not marry lyd if he had not a real regard for her . though our kind unc has don someth toward clear him , i can not believ that ten thousand pound , or anyth lik it , has been adv . he has childr of his own , and may hav mor . how could he spar half ten thousand pound ? '' `` if he wer ev abl to learn what wickham 's debt hav been , '' said elizabe , `` and how much is settl on his sid on our sist , we shal exact know what mr. gardin has don for them , becaus wickham has not sixp of his own . the kind of my unc and aunt can nev be requit . their tak her hom , and afford her their person protect and count , is such a sacr to her adv as year of gratitud can not enough acknowledg . by thi tim she is act with them ! if such good doe not mak her mis now , she wil nev deserv to be happy ! what a meet for her , when she first see my aunt ! '' `` we must endeavo to forget al that has pass on eith sid , '' said jan : `` i hop and trust they wil yet be happy . his cons to marry her is a proof , i wil believ , that he is com to a right way of think . their mut affect wil steady them ; and i flat myself they wil settl so quiet , and liv in so rat a man , as may in tim mak their past imprud forgot . '' `` their conduc has been such , '' reply elizabe , `` as neith you , nor i , nor anybody can ev forget . it is useless to talk of it . '' it now occur to the girl that their moth was in al lik perfect ign of what had hap . they went to the libr , theref , and ask their fath wheth he would not wish them to mak it known to her . he was writ and , without rais his head , cool reply : '' just as you pleas . '' `` may we tak my unc 's let to read to her ? '' `` tak whatev you lik , and get away . '' elizabe took the let from his writing-table , and they went up stair togeth . mary and kitty wer both with mrs. bennet : on commun would , theref , do for al . aft a slight prep for good new , the let was read aloud . mrs. bennet could hard contain herself . as soon as jan had read mr. gardin 's hop of lyd 's being soon marry , her joy burst for , and every follow sent ad to it exub . she was now in an irrit as viol from delight , as she had ev been fidg from alarm and vex . to know that her daught would be marry was enough . she was disturb by no fear for her fel , nor humbl by any remembr of her misconduc . `` my dear , dear lyd ! '' she cri . `` thi is delight indee ! she wil be marry ! i shal see her again ! she wil be marry at sixteen ! my good , kind broth ! i knew how it would be . i knew he would man everyth ! how i long to see her ! and to see dear wickham too ! but the cloth , the wed cloth ! i wil writ to my sist gardin about them direct . lizzy , my dear , run down to yo fath , and ask him how much he wil giv her . stay , stay , i wil go myself . ring the bel , kitty , for hil . i wil put on my thing in a mom . my dear , dear lyd ! how merry we shal be togeth when we meet ! '' her eldest daught endeavo to giv som reliev to the viol of thes transport , by lead her thought to the oblig which mr. gardin 's behavio laid them al und . `` for we must attribut thi happy conclud , '' she ad , `` in a gre meas to his kind . we ar persuad that he has pledg himself to assist mr. wickham with money . '' `` wel , '' cri her moth , `` it is al very right ; who should do it but her own unc ? if he had not had a famy of his own , i and my childr must hav had al his money , you know ; and it is the first tim we hav ev had anyth from him , exceiv a few pres . wel ! i am so happy ! in a short tim i shal hav a daught marry . mrs. wickham ! how wel it sound ! and she was on sixteen last jun . my dear jan , i am in such a flut , that i am sur i ca n't writ ; so i wil dict , and you writ for me . we wil settl with yo fath about the money afterward ; but the thing should be ord immedy . '' she was then process to al the particul of calico , muslin , and cambr , and would short hav dict som very plenty ord , had not jan , though with som difficul , persuad her to wait til her fath was at leis to be consult . on day 's delay , she observ , would be of smal import ; and her moth was too happy to be quit so obstin as us . oth schemes , too , cam into her head . `` i wil go to meryton , '' said she , `` as soon as i am dress , and tel the good , good new to my sist philip . and as i com back , i can cal on lady luca and mrs. long . kitty , run down and ord the carry . an air would do me a gre deal of good , i am sur . girl , can i do anyth for you in meryton ? oh ! her com hil ! my dear hil , hav you heard the good new ? miss lyd is going to be marry ; and you shal al hav a bowl of punch to mak merry at her wed . '' mrs. hil beg inst to express her joy . elizabe receiv her congrat amongst the rest , and then , sick of thi fol , took refug in her own room , that she might think with freedom . poor lyd 's situ must , at best , be bad enough ; but that it was no wors , she had nee to be thank . she felt it so ; and though , in look forward , neith rat happy nor world prosp could be just expect for her sist , in look back to what they had fear , on two hour ago , she felt al the adv of what they had gain . chapt 50 mr. bennet had very oft wish bef thi period of his lif that , instead of spend his whol incom , he had laid by an an sum for the bet provid of his childr , and of his wif , if she surv him . he now wish it mor than ev . had he don his duty in that respect , lyd nee not hav been indebt to her unc for whatev of hono or credit could now be purchas for her . the satisfact of prevail on on of the most worthless young men in gre britain to be her husband might then hav rest in it prop plac . he was sery concern that a caus of so littl adv to anyon should be forward at the sol expens of his brother-in-law , and he was determin , if poss , to find out the ext of his assist , and to discharg the oblig as soon as he could . when first mr. bennet had marry , econom was held to be perfect useless , for , of cours , they wer to hav a son . the son was to join in cut off the entail , as soon as he should be of ag , and the widow and young childr would by that mean be provid for . fiv daught success ent the world , but yet the son was to com ; and mrs. bennet , for many year aft lyd 's bir , had been certain that he would . thi ev had at last been despair of , but it was then too lat to be sav . mrs. bennet had no turn for econom , and her husband 's lov of independ had alon prev their excess their incom . fiv thousand pound was settl by marry artic on mrs. bennet and the childr . but in what proport it should be divid amongst the lat depend on the wil of the par . thi was on point , with regard to lyd , at least , which was now to be settl , and mr. bennet could hav no hesit in acc to the propos bef him . in term of grat acknowledg for the kind of his broth , though express most cont , he then del on pap his perfect approb of al that was don , and his wil to fulfil the eng that had been mad for him . he had nev bef suppos that , could wickham be prevail on to marry his daught , it would be don with so littl inconveny to himself as by the pres arrang . he would scarc be ten pound a year the los by the hundr that was to be paid them ; for , what with her board and pocket allow , and the contin pres in money which pass to her through her moth 's hand , lyd 's expens had been very littl within that sum . that it would be don with such trifl exert on his sid , too , was anoth very welcom surpr ; for his wish at pres was to hav as littl troubl in the busy as poss . when the first transport of rag which had produc his act in seek her wer ov , he nat return to al his form indol . his let was soon dispatch ; for , though dil in undertak busy , he was quick in it execut . he beg to know furth particul of what he was indebt to his broth , but was too angry with lyd to send any mess to her . the good new spread quick through the hous , and with proport spee through the neighbo . it was born in the lat with dec philosoph . to be sur , it would hav been mor for the adv of convers had miss lyd bennet com upon the town ; or , as the happiest altern , been seclud from the world , in som dist farmh . but ther was much to be talk of in marry her ; and the good-natur wish for her well-doing which had process bef from al the spit old lady in meryton lost but a littl of their spirit in thi chang of circumst , becaus with such an husband her misery was consid certain . it was a fortnight sint mrs. bennet had been downstair ; but on thi happy day she again took her seat at the head of her tabl , and in spirit oppress high . no senty of sham gav a damp to her triumph . the marry of a daught , which had been the first object of her wish sint jan was sixteen , was now on the point of accompl , and her thought and her word ran whol on thos attend of eleg nupt , fin muslin , new carry , and serv . she was busy search through the neighbo for a prop situ for her daught , and , without know or consid what their incom might be , reject many as deficy in siz and import . `` hay park might do , '' said she , `` if the gould could quit it—or the gre hous at stok , if the drawing-room wer larg ; but ashwor is too far off ! i could not bear to hav her ten mil from me ; and as for pulv lodg , the at ar dread . '' her husband allow her to talk on without interrupt whil the serv remain . but when they had withdrawn , he said to her : `` mrs. bennet , bef you tak any or al of thes hous for yo son and daught , let us com to a right understand . into on hous in thi neighbo they shal nev hav admit . i wil not enco the impud of eith , by receiv them at longbourn . '' a long disput follow thi decl ; but mr. bennet was firm . it soon led to anoth ; and mrs. bennet found , with amaz and hor , that her husband would not adv a guine to buy cloth for his daught . he protest that she should receiv from him no mark of affect whatev on the occas . mrs. bennet could hard comprehend it . that his ang could be carry to such a point of inconceiv res as to refus his daught a privileg without which her marry would scarc seem valid , excess al she could believ poss . she was mor al to the disgrac which her want of new cloth must reflect on her daught 's nupt , than to any sens of sham at her elop and liv with wickham a fortnight bef they took plac . elizabe was now most hearty sorry that she had , from the distress of the mom , been led to mak mr. darcy acquaint with their fear for her sist ; for sint her marry would so short giv the prop termin to the elop , they might hop to cont it unfavo begin from al thos who wer not immedy on the spot . she had no fear of it spreading farth through his mean . ther wer few peopl on whos secrecy she would hav mor confid depend ; but , at the sam tim , ther was no on whos knowledg of a sist 's frail would hav mort her so much—not , howev , from any fear of disadv from it individ to herself , for , at any rat , ther seem a gulf impass between them . had lyd 's marry been conclud on the most hono term , it was not to be suppos that mr. darcy would connect himself with a famy wher , to every oth object , would now be ad an al and rel of the nearest kind with a man whom he so just scorn . from such a connect she could not wond that he would shrink . the wish of proc her regard , which she had ass herself of his feel in derbyshir , could not in rat expect surv such a blow as thi . she was humbl , she was griev ; she rep , though she hard knew of what . she becam jeal of his esteem , when she could no long hop to be benefit by it . she want to hear of him , when ther seem the least chant of gain intellig . she was convint that she could hav been happy with him , when it was no long lik they should meet . what a triumph for him , as she oft thought , could he know that the propos which she had proud spurn on four month ago , would now hav been most glad and grat receiv ! he was as gen , she doubt not , as the most gen of his sex ; but whil he was mort , ther must be a triumph . she beg now to comprehend that he was exact the man who , in disposit and tal , would most suit her . his understand and temp , though unlik her own , would hav answ al her wish . it was an un that must hav been to the adv of both ; by her eas and liv , his mind might hav been soft , his man improv ; and from his judg , inform , and knowledg of the world , she must hav receiv benefit of gre import . but no such happy marry could now teach the admir multitud what connub fel real was . an un of a diff tend , and preclud the poss of the oth , was soon to be form in their famy . how wickham and lyd wer to be support in tol independ , she could not imagin . but how littl of perm happy could belong to a coupl who wer on brought togeth becaus their pass wer stronger than their virtu , she could easy conject . mr. gardin soon wrot again to his broth . to mr. bennet 's acknowledg he brief reply , with ass of his eag to promot the welf of any of his famy ; and conclud with entreaty that the subject might nev be ment to him again . the princip purport of his let was to inform them that mr. wickham had resolv on quit the milit . `` it was gre my wish that he should do so , '' he ad , `` as soon as his marry was fix on . and i think you wil agr with me , in consid the remov from that corp as high adv , both on his account and my niec 's . it is mr. wickham 's int to go into the regul ; and among his form friend , ther ar stil som who ar abl and wil to assist him in the army . he has the prom of an ensignt in gen —— 's regy , now quart in the nor . it is an adv to hav it so far from thi part of the kingdom . he prom fair ; and i hop among diff peopl , wher they may each hav a charact to preserv , they wil both be mor prud . i hav writ to colonel forst , to inform him of our pres arrang , and to request that he wil satisfy the vary credit of mr. wickham in and near brighton , with ass of speedy pay , for which i hav pledg myself . and wil you giv yourself the troubl of carry simil ass to his credit in meryton , of whom i shal subjoin a list accord to his inform ? he has giv in al his debt ; i hop at least he has not deceiv us . haggerston has our direct , and al wil be complet in a week . they wil then join his regy , unless they ar first invit to longbourn ; and i understand from mrs. gardin , that my niec is very desir of see you al bef she leav the sou . she is wel , and beg to be duty rememb to you and her mother.—yours , etc. , '' e . gardin . '' mr. bennet and his daught saw al the adv of wickham 's remov from the ——shire as clear as mr. gardin could do . but mrs. bennet was not so wel pleas with it . lyd 's being settl in the nor , just when she had expect most pleas and prid in her company , for she had by no mean giv up her plan of their resid in hertfordshir , was a sev disappoint ; and , besid , it was such a pity that lyd should be tak from a regy wher she was acquaint with everybody , and had so many favourit . `` she is so fond of mrs. forst , '' said she , `` it wil be quit shock to send her away ! and ther ar sev of the young men , too , that she lik very much . the off may not be so pleas in gen —— 's regy . '' his daught 's request , for such it might be consid , of being admit into her famy again bef she set off for the nor , receiv at first an absolv neg . but jan and elizabe , who agree in wish , for the sak of their sist 's feel and consequ , that she should be not on her marry by her par , urg him so earnest yet so rat and so mild , to receiv her and her husband at longbourn , as soon as they wer marry , that he was prevail on to think as they thought , and act as they wish . and their moth had the satisfact of know that she would be abl to show her marry daught in the neighbo bef she was ban to the nor . when mr. bennet wrot again to his broth , theref , he sent his permit for them to com ; and it was settl , that as soon as the ceremony was ov , they should process to longbourn . elizabe was surpr , howev , that wickham should cons to such a scheme , and had she consult on her own inclin , any meet with him would hav been the last object of her wish . chapt 51 their sist 's wed day ar ; and jan and elizabe felt for her prob mor than she felt for herself . the carry was sent to meet them at —— , and they wer to return in it by dinner-time . their ar was dread by the eld miss bennet , and jan mor espec , who gav lyd the feel which would hav attend herself , had she been the culprit , and was wretch in the thought of what her sist must end . they cam . the famy wer assembl in the breakfast room to receiv them . smil deck the fac of mrs. bennet as the carry drov up to the door ; her husband look impenet grav ; her daught , alarm , anxy , uneasy . lyd 's voic was heard in the vestib ; the door was thrown op , and she ran into the room . her moth step forward , embrac her , and welcom her with rapt ; gav her hand , with an affect smil , to wickham , who follow his lady ; and wish them both joy with an alacr which shew no doubt of their happy . their receiv from mr. bennet , to whom they then turn , was not quit so cord . his count rath gain in aust ; and he scarc op his lip . the easy ass of the young coupl , indee , was enough to provok him . elizabe was disgust , and ev miss bennet was shock . lyd was lyd stil ; untam , unabash , wild , noisy , and fearless . she turn from sist to sist , demand their congrat ; and when at leng they al sat down , look eag round the room , took not of som littl alt in it , and observ , with a laugh , that it was a gre whil sint she had been ther . wickham was not at al mor distress than herself , but his man wer alway so pleas , that had his charact and his marry been exact what they ought , his smil and his easy address , whil he claim their rel , would hav delight them al . elizabe had not bef believ him quit eq to such ass ; but she sat down , resolv within herself to draw no limit in fut to the impud of an impud man . she blush , and jan blush ; but the cheek of the two who caus their confus suff no vary of colo . ther was no want of discours . the brid and her moth could neith of them talk fast enough ; and wickham , who hap to sit near elizabe , beg inquir aft his acquaint in that neighbo , with a good humo eas which she felt very un to eq in her reply . they seem each of them to hav the happiest mem in the world . noth of the past was recollect with pain ; and lyd led volunt to subject which her sist would not hav allud to for the world . `` on think of it being three month , '' she cri , `` sint i went away ; it seem but a fortnight i decl ; and yet ther hav been thing enough hap in the tim . good gracy ! when i went away , i am sur i had no mor ide of being marry til i cam back again ! though i thought it would be very good fun if i was . '' her fath lift up his ey . jan was distress . elizabe look express at lyd ; but she , who nev heard nor saw anyth of which she chos to be insens , gai continu , `` oh ! mamm , do the peopl hereabout know i am marry to-day ? i was afraid they might not ; and we overtook william gould in his curric , so i was determin he should know it , and so i let down the side-glass next to him , and took off my glov , and let my hand just rest upon the window fram , so that he might see the ring , and then i bow and smil lik anyth . '' elizabe could bear it no long . she got up , and ran out of the room ; and return no mor , til she heard them pass through the hal to the din parlo . she then join them soon enough to see lyd , with anxy parad , walk up to her moth 's right hand , and hear her say to her eldest sist , `` ah ! jan , i tak yo plac now , and you must go low , becaus i am a marry wom . '' it was not to be suppos that tim would giv lyd that embarrass from which she had been so whol fre at first . her eas and good spirit increas . she long to see mrs. phillip , the lucas , and al their oth neighbo , and to hear herself cal `` mrs. wickham '' by each of them ; and in the mean tim , she went aft din to show her ring , and boast of being marry , to mrs. hil and the two housemaid . `` wel , mamm , '' said she , when they wer al return to the breakfast room , `` and what do you think of my husband ? is not he a charm man ? i am sur my sist must al envy me . i on hop they may hav half my good luck . they must al go to brighton . that is the plac to get husband . what a pity it is , mamm , we did not al go . '' `` very tru ; and if i had my wil , we should . but my dear lyd , i do n't at al lik yo going such a way off . must it be so ? '' `` oh , lord ! ye ; —there is noth in that . i shal lik it of al thing . you and pap , and my sist , must com down and see us . we shal be at newcastl al the wint , and i dar say ther wil be som bal , and i wil tak car to get good partn for them al . '' `` i should lik it beyond anyth ! '' said her moth . `` and then when you go away , you may leav on or two of my sist behind you ; and i dar say i shal get husband for them bef the wint is ov . '' `` i thank you for my shar of the favo , '' said elizabe ; `` but i do not particul lik yo way of get husband . '' their visit wer not to remain abov ten day with them . mr. wickham had receiv his commit bef he left london , and he was to join his regy at the end of a fortnight . no on but mrs. bennet regret that their stay would be so short ; and she mad the most of the tim by visit about with her daught , and hav very frequ party at hom . thes party wer acceiv to al ; to avoid a famy circ was ev mor desir to such as did think , than such as did not . wickham 's affect for lyd was just what elizabe had expect to find it ; not eq to lyd 's for him . she had scarc nee her pres observ to be satisfy , from the reason of thing , that their elop had been brought on by the strength of her lov , rath than by his ; and she would hav wond why , without viol car for her , he chos to elop with her at al , had she not felt certain that his flight was rend necess by distress of circumst ; and if that wer the cas , he was not the young man to resist an opportun of hav a comp . lyd was excess fond of him . he was her dear wickham on every occas ; no on was to be put in competit with him . he did every thing best in the world ; and she was sur he would kil mor bird on the first of septemb , than any body els in the country . on morn , soon aft their ar , as she was sit with her two eld sist , she said to elizabe : '' lizzy , i nev gav you an account of my wed , i believ . you wer not by , when i told mamm and the oth al about it . ar not you cury to hear how it was man ? '' `` no real , '' reply elizabe ; `` i think ther can not be too littl said on the subject . '' `` la ! you ar so strange ! but i must tel you how it went off . we wer marry , you know , at st. cle 's , becaus wickham 's lodg wer in that par . and it was settl that we should al be ther by elev o'clock . my unc and aunt and i wer to go togeth ; and the oth wer to meet us at the church . wel , monday morn cam , and i was in such a fuss ! i was so afraid , you know , that someth would hap to put it off , and then i should hav gon quit distract . and ther was my aunt , al the tim i was dress , preach and talk away just as if she was read a sermon . howev , i did not hear abov on word in ten , for i was think , you may suppos , of my dear wickham . i long to know wheth he would be marry in his blu coat . '' `` wel , and so we breakfast at ten as us ; i thought it would nev be ov ; for , by the bye , you ar to understand , that my unc and aunt wer horrid unpleas al the tim i was with them . if you 'll believ me , i did not ont put my foot out of door , though i was ther a fortnight . not on party , or scheme , or anyth . to be sur london was rath thin , but , howev , the littl the was op . wel , and so just as the carry cam to the door , my unc was cal away upon busy to that horrid man mr. ston . and then , you know , when ont they get togeth , ther is no end of it . wel , i was so fright i did not know what to do , for my unc was to giv me away ; and if we wer beyond the hour , we could not be marry al day . but , lucky , he cam back again in ten minut ' tim , and then we al set out . howev , i recollect afterward that if he had been prev going , the wed nee not be put off , for mr. darcy might hav don as wel . '' `` mr . darcy ! '' rep elizabe , in ut amaz . `` oh , ye ! —he was to com ther with wickham , you know . but gracy me ! i quit forgot ! i ought not to hav said a word about it . i prom them so faith ! what wil wickham say ? it was to be such a secret ! '' `` if it was to be secret , '' said jan , `` say not anoth word on the subject . you may depend upon my seek no furth . '' `` oh ! certain , '' said elizabe , though burn with curios ; `` we wil ask you no quest . '' `` thank you , '' said lyd , `` for if you did , i should certain tel you al , and then wickham would be angry . '' on such enco to ask , elizabe was forc to put it out of her pow , by run away . but to liv in ign on such a point was imposs ; or at least it was imposs not to try for inform . mr. darcy had been at her sist 's wed . it was exact a scen , and exact among peopl , wher he had app least to do , and least tempt to go . conject as to the mean of it , rapid and wild , hurry into her brain ; but she was satisfy with non . thos that best pleas her , as plac his conduc in the noblest light , seem most improb . she could not bear such suspens ; and hasty seiz a sheet of pap , wrot a short let to her aunt , to request an expl of what lyd had dropt , if it wer compat with the secrecy which had been intend . `` you may ready comprehend , '' she ad , `` what my curios must be to know how a person unconnect with any of us , and ( comp speak ) a stranger to our famy , should hav been amongst you at such a tim . pray writ inst , and let me understand it—unless it is , for very cog reason , to remain in the secrecy which lyd seem to think necess ; and then i must endeavo to be satisfy with ign . '' `` not that i shal , though , '' she ad to herself , as she fin the let ; `` and my dear aunt , if you do not tel me in an hono man , i shal certain be reduc to trick and stratagems to find it out . '' jan 's del sens of hono would not allow her to speak to elizabe priv of what lyd had let fal ; elizabe was glad of it ; —till it appear wheth her inquiry would receiv any satisfact , she had rath be without a confid . chapt 52 elizabe had the satisfact of receiv an answ to her let as soon as she poss could . she was no soon in possess of it than , hurry into the littl cops , wher she was least lik to be interrupt , she sat down on on of the bench and prep to be happy ; for the leng of the let convint her that it did not contain a den . `` gracechurch street , sept. 6 . `` my dear niec , '' i hav just receiv yo let , and shal devot thi whol morn to answ it , as i fores that a littl writ wil not compr what i hav to tel you . i must confess myself surpr by yo apply ; i did not expect it from you . do n't think me angry , howev , for i on mean to let you know that i had not imagin such inquiry to be necess on yo sid . if you do not choos to understand me , forg my impertin . yo unc is as much surpr as i am—and noth but the believ of yo being a party concern would hav allow him to act as he has don . but if you ar real innoc and ign , i must be mor explicit . `` on the very day of my com hom from longbourn , yo unc had a most unexpect visit . mr. darcy cal , and was shut up with him sev hour . it was al ov bef i ar ; so my curios was not so dread rack as yo seem to hav been . he cam to tel mr. gardin that he had found out wher yo sist and mr. wickham wer , and that he had seen and talk with them both ; wickham rep , lyd ont . from what i can collect , he left derbyshir on on day aft ourselv , and cam to town with the resolv of hunt for them . the mot profess was his convict of it being ow to himself that wickham 's worthless had not been so wel known as to mak it imposs for any young wom of charact to lov or confid in him . he gen imput the whol to his mistak prid , and confess that he had bef thought it benea him to lay his priv act op to the world . his charact was to speak for itself . he cal it , theref , his duty to step forward , and endeavo to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself . if he had anoth mot , i am sur it would nev disgrac him . he had been som day in town , bef he was abl to discov them ; but he had someth to direct his search , which was mor than we had ; and the conscy of thi was anoth reason for his resolv to follow us . `` ther is a lady , it seem , a mrs. young , who was som tim ago gov to miss darcy , and was dismiss from her charg on som caus of disapprob , though he did not say what . she then took a larg hous in edward-street , and has sint maintain herself by let lodg . thi mrs. young was , he knew , intim acquaint with wickham ; and he went to her for intellig of him as soon as he got to town . but it was two or three day bef he could get from her what he want . she would not betray her trust , i suppos , without bribery and corrupt , for she real did know wher her friend was to be found . wickham indee had gon to her on their first ar in london , and had she been abl to receiv them into her hous , they would hav tak up their abod with her . at leng , howev , our kind friend proc the wished-for direct . they wer in —— street . he saw wickham , and afterward insist on see lyd . his first object with her , he acknowledg , had been to persuad her to quit her pres disgrac situ , and return to her friend as soon as they could be prevail on to receiv her , off his assist , as far as it would go . but he found lyd absolv resolv on remain wher she was . she car for non of her friend ; she want no help of his ; she would not hear of leav wickham . she was sur they should be marry som tim or oth , and it did not much sign when . sint such wer her feel , it on remain , he thought , to sec and expedit a marry , which , in his very first convers with wickham , he easy learnt had nev been his design . he confess himself oblig to leav the regy , on account of som debt of hono , which wer very press ; and scrupled not to lay al the ill-consequences of lyd 's flight on her own fol alon . he meant to resign his commit immedy ; and as to his fut situ , he could conject very littl about it . he must go somewh , but he did not know wher , and he knew he should hav noth to liv on . `` mr. darcy ask him why he had not marry yo sist at ont . though mr. bennet was not imagin to be very rich , he would hav been abl to do someth for him , and his situ must hav been benefit by marry . but he found , in reply to thi quest , that wickham stil cher the hop of mor effect mak his fortun by marry in som oth country . und such circumst , howev , he was not lik to be proof against the tempt of immedy reliev . `` they met sev tim , for ther was much to be discuss . wickham of cours want mor than he could get ; but at leng was reduc to be reason . `` every thing being settl between them , mr. darcy 's next step was to mak yo unc acquaint with it , and he first cal in gracechurch street the ev bef i cam hom . but mr. gardin could not be seen , and mr. darcy found , on furth inquiry , that yo fath was stil with him , but would quit town the next morn . he did not judg yo fath to be a person whom he could so prop consult as yo unc , and theref ready postpon see him til aft the depart of the form . he did not leav his nam , and til the next day it was on known that a gentlem had cal on busy . `` on saturday he cam again . yo fath was gon , yo unc at hom , and , as i said bef , they had a gre deal of talk togeth . `` they met again on sunday , and then i saw him too . it was not al settl bef monday : as soon as it was , the express was sent off to longbourn . but our visit was very obstin . i fant , lizzy , that obstin is the real defect of his charact , aft al . he has been accus of many fault at diff tim , but thi is the tru on . noth was to be don that he did not do himself ; though i am sur ( and i do not speak it to be thank , theref say noth about it ) , yo unc would most ready hav settl the whol . `` they battl it togeth for a long tim , which was mor than eith the gentlem or lady concern in it deserv . but at last yo unc was forc to yield , and instead of being allow to be of us to his niec , was forc to put up with on hav the prob credit of it , which went sor against the grain ; and i real believ yo let thi morn gav him gre pleas , becaus it requir an expl that would rob him of his borrow feath , and giv the pra wher it was due . but , lizzy , thi must go no farth than yourself , or jan at most . `` you know pretty wel , i suppos , what has been don for the young peopl . his debt ar to be paid , amount , i believ , to consid mor than a thousand pound , anoth thousand in addit to her own settl upon her , and his commit purchas . the reason why al thi was to be don by him alon , was such as i hav giv abov . it was ow to him , to his reserv and want of prop consid , that wickham 's charact had been so misunderstood , and consequ that he had been receiv and not as he was . perhap ther was som tru in thi ; though i doubt wheth his reserv , or anybody 's reserv , can be answ for the ev . but in spit of al thi fin talk , my dear lizzy , you may rest perfect ass that yo unc would nev hav yield , if we had not giv him credit for anoth interest in the affair . `` when al thi was resolv on , he return again to his friend , who wer stil stay at pemberley ; but it was agree that he should be in london ont mor when the wed took plac , and al money mat wer then to receiv the last fin . `` i believ i hav now told you every thing . it is a rel which you tel me is to giv you gre surpr ; i hop at least it wil not afford you any displeas . lyd cam to us ; and wickham had const admit to the hous . he was exact what he had been , when i knew him in hertfordshir ; but i would not tel you how littl i was satisfy with her behavio whil she staid with us , if i had not perceiv , by jan 's let last wednesday , that her conduc on com hom was exact of a piec with it , and theref what i now tel you can giv you no fresh pain . i talk to her rep in the most sery man , repres to her al the wick of what she had don , and al the unhappy she had brought on her famy . if she heard me , it was by good luck , for i am sur she did not list . i was sometim quit provok , but then i recollect my dear elizabe and jan , and for their sak had paty with her . `` mr. darcy was punct in his return , and as lyd inform you , attend the wed . he din with us the next day , and was to leav town again on wednesday or thursday . wil you be very angry with me , my dear lizzy , if i tak thi opportun of say ( what i was nev bold enough to say bef ) how much i lik him . his behavio to us has , in every respect , been as pleas as when we wer in derbyshir . his understand and opin al pleas me ; he want noth but a littl mor liv , and that , if he marry prud , his wif may teach him . i thought him very sly ; —he hard ev ment yo nam . but sly seem the fash . `` pray forg me if i hav been very presum , or at least do not pun me so far as to exclud me from p. i shal nev be quit happy til i hav been al round the park . a low phaeton , with a nic littl pair of pony , would be the very thing . `` but i must writ no mor . the childr hav been want me thi half hour . `` yo , very sint , '' m . gardin . '' the cont of thi let threw elizabe into a flut of spirit , in which it was difficult to determin wheth pleas or pain bor the greatest shar . the vagu and unsettl susp which uncertainty had produc of what mr. darcy might hav been doing to forward her sist 's match , which she had fear to enco as an exert of good too gre to be prob , and at the sam tim dread to be just , from the pain of oblig , wer prov beyond their greatest ext to be tru ! he had follow them purpos to town , he had tak on himself al the troubl and mort attend on such a research ; in which supply had been necess to a wom whom he must abomin and desp , and wher he was reduc to meet , frequ meet , reason with , persuad , and fin brib , the man whom he alway most wish to avoid , and whos very nam it was pun to him to pronount . he had don al thi for a girl whom he could neith regard nor esteem . her heart did whisp that he had don it for her . but it was a hop short check by oth consid , and she soon felt that ev her van was insufficy , when requir to depend on his affect for her—f a wom who had already refus him—as abl to overcom a senty so nat as abhor against rel with wickham . brother-in-law of wickham ! every kind of prid must revolt from the connect . he had , to be sur , don much . she was asham to think how much . but he had giv a reason for his interf , which ask no extraordin stretch of believ . it was reason that he should feel he had been wrong ; he had lib , and he had the mean of exerc it ; and though she would not plac herself as his princip induc , she could , perhap , believ that remain part for her might assist his endeavo in a caus wher her peac of mind must be mat concern . it was pain , excess pain , to know that they wer und oblig to a person who could nev receiv a return . they ow the rest of lyd , her charact , every thing , to him . oh ! how hearty did she griev ov every ungr sens she had ev enco , every saucy speech she had ev direct toward him . for herself she was humbl ; but she was proud of him . proud that in a caus of compass and hono , he had been abl to get the bet of himself . she read ov her aunt 's commend of him again and again . it was hard enough ; but it pleas her . she was ev sens of som pleas , though mix with regret , on find how steadfast both she and her unc had been persuad that affect and confid subsist between mr. darcy and herself . she was rous from her seat , and her reflect , by som on 's approach ; and bef she could strike into anoth path , she was overtak by wickham . `` i am afraid i interrupt yo solit rambl , my dear sist ? '' said he , as he join her . `` you certain do , '' she reply with a smil ; `` but it doe not follow that the interrupt must be unwelcom . '' `` i should be sorry indee , if it wer . we wer alway good friend ; and now we ar bet . '' `` tru . ar the oth com out ? '' `` i do not know . mrs. bennet and lyd ar going in the carry to meryton . and so , my dear sist , i find , from our unc and aunt , that you hav act seen pemberley . '' she reply in the affirm . `` i almost envy you the pleas , and yet i believ it would be too much for me , or els i could tak it in my way to newcastl . and you saw the old housekeep , i suppos ? poor reynold , she was alway very fond of me . but of cours she did not ment my nam to you . '' `` ye , she did . '' `` and what did she say ? '' `` that you wer gon into the army , and she was afraid had—not turn out wel . at such a dist as that , you know , thing ar strangely misrepres . '' `` certain , '' he reply , bit his lip . elizabe hop she had sil him ; but he soon afterward said : '' i was surpr to see darcy in town last mon . we pass each oth sev tim . i wond what he can be doing ther . '' `` perhap prep for his marry with miss de bourgh , '' said elizabe . `` it must be someth particul , to tak him ther at thi tim of year . '' `` undoubt . did you see him whil you wer at lambton ? i thought i understood from the gardin that you had . '' `` ye ; he introduc us to his sist . '' `` and do you lik her ? '' `` very much . '' `` i hav heard , indee , that she is uncommon improv within thi year or two . when i last saw her , she was not very prom . i am very glad you lik her . i hop she wil turn out wel . '' `` i dar say she wil ; she has got ov the most try ag . '' `` did you go by the vil of kympton ? '' `` i do not recollect that we did . '' `` i ment it , becaus it is the liv which i ought to hav had . a most delight plac ! —excellent parson hous ! it would hav suit me in every respect . '' `` how should you hav lik mak sermon ? '' `` excess wel . i should hav consid it as part of my duty , and the exert would soon hav been noth . on ought not to repin ; —but , to be sur , it would hav been such a thing for me ! the quiet , the retir of such a lif would hav answ al my idea of happy ! but it was not to be . did you ev hear darcy ment the circumst , when you wer in kent ? '' `` i hav heard from auth , which i thought as good , that it was left you condit on , and at the wil of the pres patron . '' `` you hav . ye , ther was someth in that ; i told you so from the first , you may rememb . '' `` i did hear , too , that ther was a tim , when sermon-making was not so pal to you as it seem to be at pres ; that you act decl yo resolv of nev tak ord , and that the busy had been comprom accord . '' `` you did ! and it was not whol without found . you may rememb what i told you on that point , when first we talk of it . '' they wer now almost at the door of the hous , for she had walk fast to get rid of him ; and unwil , for her sist 's sak , to provok him , she on said in reply , with a good-humour smil : '' com , mr. wickham , we ar broth and sist , you know . do not let us quarrel about the past . in fut , i hop we shal be alway of on mind . '' she held out her hand ; he kiss it with affect gallantry , though he hard knew how to look , and they ent the hous . chapt 53 mr. wickham was so perfect satisfy with thi convers that he nev again distress himself , or provok his dear sist elizabe , by introduc the subject of it ; and she was pleas to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet . the day of his and lyd 's depart soon cam , and mrs. bennet was forc to submit to a sep , which , as her husband by no mean ent into her scheme of their al going to newcastl , was lik to continu at least a twelvemon . `` oh ! my dear lyd , '' she cri , `` when shal we meet again ? '' `` oh , lord ! i do n't know . not thes two or three year , perhap . '' `` writ to me very oft , my dear . '' `` as oft as i can . but you know marry wom hav nev much tim for writ . my sist may writ to me . they wil hav noth els to do . '' mr. wickham 's adie wer much mor affect than his wif 's . he smil , look handsom , and said many pretty thing . `` he is as fin a fellow , '' said mr. bennet , as soon as they wer out of the hous , `` as ev i saw . he simp , and smirk , and mak lov to us al . i am prodigy proud of him . i defy ev sir william luca himself to produc a mor valu son-in-law . '' the loss of her daught mad mrs. bennet very dul for sev day . `` i oft think , '' said she , `` that ther is noth so bad as part with on 's friend . on seem so forlorn without them . '' `` thi is the consequ , you see , madam , of marry a daught , '' said elizabe . `` it must mak you bet satisfy that yo oth four ar singl . '' `` it is no such thing . lyd doe not leav me becaus she is marry , but on becaus her husband 's regy hap to be so far off . if that had been near , she would not hav gon so soon . '' but the spiritless condit which thi ev threw her into was short reliev , and her mind op again to the agit of hop , by an artic of new which then beg to be in circ . the housekeep at netherfield had receiv ord to prep for the ar of her mast , who was com down in a day or two , to shoot ther for sev week . mrs. bennet was quit in the fidget . she look at jan , and smil and shook her head by turn . `` wel , wel , and so mr. bingley is com down , sist , '' ( for mrs. phillip first brought her the new ) . `` wel , so much the bet . not that i car about it , though . he is noth to us , you know , and i am sur i nev want to see him again . but , howev , he is very welcom to com to netherfield , if he lik it . and who know what may hap ? but that is noth to us . you know , sist , we agree long ago nev to ment a word about it . and so , is it quit certain he is com ? '' `` you may depend on it , '' reply the oth , `` for mrs. nichol was in meryton last night ; i saw her pass by , and went out myself on purpos to know the tru of it ; and she told me that it was certain tru . he com down on thursday at the latest , very lik on wednesday . she was going to the butch 's , she told me , on purpos to ord in som meat on wednesday , and she has got three coupl of duck just fit to be kil . '' miss bennet had not been abl to hear of his com without chang colo . it was many month sint she had ment his nam to elizabe ; but now , as soon as they wer alon togeth , she said : '' i saw you look at me to-day , lizzy , when my aunt told us of the pres report ; and i know i appear distress . but do n't imagin it was from any sil caus . i was on confus for the mom , becaus i felt that i should be look at . i do ass you that the new doe not affect me eith with pleas or pain . i am glad of on thing , that he com alon ; becaus we shal see the less of him . not that i am afraid of myself , but i dread oth peopl 's remark . '' elizabe did not know what to mak of it . had she not seen him in derbyshir , she might hav suppos him cap of com ther with no oth view than what was acknowledg ; but she stil thought him part to jan , and she wav as to the gre prob of his com ther with his friend 's permit , or being bold enough to com without it . `` yet it is hard , '' she sometim thought , `` that thi poor man can not com to a hous which he has leg hir , without rais al thi spec ! i wil leav him to himself . '' in spit of what her sist decl , and real believ to be her feel in the expect of his ar , elizabe could easy perceiv that her spirit wer affect by it . they wer mor disturb , mor uneq , than she had oft seen them . the subject which had been so warm canvass between their par , about a twelvemon ago , was now brought forward again . `` as soon as ev mr. bingley com , my dear , '' said mrs. bennet , `` you wil wait on him of cours . '' `` no , no . you forc me into visit him last year , and prom , if i went to see him , he should marry on of my daught . but it end in noth , and i wil not be sent on a fool 's errand again . '' his wif repres to him how absolv necess such an at would be from al the neighbo gentlem , on his return to netherfield . `` 't is an etiquet i desp , '' said he . `` if he want our socy , let him seek it . he know wher we liv . i wil not spend my hour in run aft my neighbo every tim they go away and com back again . '' `` wel , al i know is , that it wil be abomin rud if you do not wait on him . but , howev , that sha n't prev my ask him to din her , i am determin . we must hav mrs. long and the gould soon . that wil mak thirteen with ourselv , so ther wil be just room at tabl for him . '' consol by thi resolv , she was the bet abl to bear her husband 's incivil ; though it was very mort to know that her neighbo might al see mr. bingley , in consequ of it , bef they did . as the day of his ar drew near , — '' i begin to be sorry that he com at al , '' said jan to her sist . `` it would be noth ; i could see him with perfect indiff , but i can hard bear to hear it thu perpet talk of . my moth mean wel ; but she doe not know , no on can know , how much i suff from what she say . happy shal i be , when his stay at netherfield is ov ! '' `` i wish i could say anyth to comfort you , '' reply elizabe ; `` but it is whol out of my pow . you must feel it ; and the us satisfact of preach paty to a suff is deny me , becaus you hav alway so much . '' mr. bingley ar . mrs. bennet , through the assist of serv , cont to hav the earliest tid of it , that the period of anxy and fret on her sid might be as long as it could . she count the day that must interv bef their invit could be sent ; hopeless of see him bef . but on the third morn aft his ar in hertfordshir , she saw him , from her dressing-room window , ent the paddock and rid toward the hous . her daught wer eag cal to partak of her joy . jan resolv kept her plac at the tabl ; but elizabe , to satisfy her moth , went to the window—she look , —she saw mr. darcy with him , and sat down again by her sist . `` ther is a gentlem with him , mamm , '' said kitty ; `` who can it be ? '' `` som acquaint or oth , my dear , i suppos ; i am sur i do not know . '' `` la ! '' reply kitty , `` it look just lik that man that us to be with him bef . mr. what's-his-name . that tal , proud man . '' `` good gracy ! mr. darcy ! —and so it doe , i vow . wel , any friend of mr. bingley 's wil alway be welcom her , to be sur ; but els i must say that i hat the very sight of him . '' jan look at elizabe with surpr and concern . she knew but littl of their meet in derbyshir , and theref felt for the awkward which must attend her sist , in see him almost for the first tim aft receiv his expl let . both sist wer uncomfort enough . each felt for the oth , and of cours for themselv ; and their moth talk on , of her dislik of mr. darcy , and her resolv to be civil to him on as mr. bingley 's friend , without being heard by eith of them . but elizabe had sourc of uneasy which could not be suspect by jan , to whom she had nev yet had cour to shew mrs. gardin 's let , or to rel her own chang of senty toward him . to jan , he could be on a man whos propos she had refus , and whos merit she had undervalu ; but to her own mor extend inform , he was the person to whom the whol famy wer indebt for the first of benefit , and whom she regard herself with an interest , if not quit so tend , at least as reason and just as what jan felt for bingley . her aston at his coming—at his com to netherfield , to longbourn , and volunt seek her again , was almost eq to what she had known on first wit his alt behavio in derbyshir . the colo which had been driv from her fac , return for half a minut with an addit glow , and a smil of delight ad lust to her ey , as she thought for that spac of tim that his affect and wish must stil be unshak . but she would not be sec . `` let me first see how he behav , '' said she ; `` it wil then be ear enough for expect . '' she sat int at work , striving to be compos , and without dar to lift up her ey , til anxy curios carry them to the fac of her sist as the serv was approach the door . jan look a littl pal than us , but mor sed than elizabe had expect . on the gentlem 's appear , her colo increas ; yet she receiv them with tol eas , and with a propry of behavio eq fre from any symptom of res or any unnecess compla . elizabe said as littl to eith as civil would allow , and sat down again to her work , with an eag which it did not oft command . she had vent on on glant at darcy . he look sery , as us ; and , she thought , mor as he had been us to look in hertfordshir , than as she had seen him at pemberley . but , perhap he could not in her moth 's pres be what he was bef her unc and aunt . it was a pain , but not an improb , conject . bingley , she had likew seen for an inst , and in that short period saw him look both pleas and embarrass . he was receiv by mrs. bennet with a degr of civil which mad her two daught asham , espec when contrast with the cold and ceremony polit of her curtsey and address to his friend . elizabe , particul , who knew that her moth ow to the lat the preserv of her favourit daught from irremedy infamy , was hurt and distress to a most pain degr by a distinct so il apply . darcy , aft inquir of her how mr. and mrs. gardin did , a quest which she could not answ without confus , said scarc anyth . he was not seat by her ; perhap that was the reason of his sil ; but it had not been so in derbyshir . ther he had talk to her friend , when he could not to herself . but now sev minut elaps without bring the sound of his voic ; and when occas , un to resist the impuls of curios , she rais her ey to his fac , she as oft found him look at jan as at herself , and frequ on no object but the ground . mor thought and less anxy to pleas , than when they last met , wer plain express . she was disappoint , and angry with herself for being so . `` could i expect it to be otherw ! '' said she . `` yet why did he com ? '' she was in no humo for convers with anyon but himself ; and to him she had hard cour to speak . she inquir aft his sist , but could do no mor . `` it is a long tim , mr. bingley , sint you went away , '' said mrs. bennet . he ready agree to it . `` i beg to be afraid you would nev com back again . peopl did say you meant to quit the plac entir at michaelma ; but , howev , i hop it is not tru . a gre many chang hav hap in the neighbo , sint you went away . miss luca is marry and settl . and on of my own daught . i suppos you hav heard of it ; indee , you must hav seen it in the pap . it was in the tim and the coury , i know ; though it was not put in as it ought to be . it was on said , 'lately , georg wickham , esq . to miss lyd bennet , ' without ther being a syl said of her fath , or the plac wher she liv , or anyth . it was my broth gardin 's draw up too , and i wond how he cam to mak such an awkward busy of it . did you see it ? '' bingley reply that he did , and mad his congrat . elizabe dar not lift up her ey . how mr. darcy look , theref , she could not tel . `` it is a delight thing , to be sur , to hav a daught wel marry , '' continu her moth , `` but at the sam tim , mr. bingley , it is very hard to hav her tak such a way from me . they ar gon down to newcastl , a plac quit northward , it seem , and ther they ar to stay i do not know how long . his regy is ther ; for i suppos you hav heard of his leav the ——shire , and of his being gon into the regul . thank heav ! he has som friend , though perhap not so many as he deserv . '' elizabe , who knew thi to be level at mr. darcy , was in such misery of sham , that she could hard keep her seat . it drew from her , howev , the exert of speak , which noth els had so effect don bef ; and she ask bingley wheth he meant to mak any stay in the country at pres . a few week , he believ . `` when you hav kil al yo own bird , mr. bingley , '' said her moth , `` i beg you wil com her , and shoot as many as you pleas on mr. bennet 's man . i am sur he wil be vast happy to oblig you , and wil sav al the best of the covy for you . '' elizabe 's misery increas , at such unnecess , such officy at ! wer the sam fair prospect to ar at pres as had flat them a year ago , every thing , she was persuad , would be hast to the sam vexaty conclud . at that inst , she felt that year of happy could not mak jan or herself amend for mom of such pain confus . `` the first wish of my heart , '' said she to herself , `` is nev mor to be in company with eith of them . their socy can afford no pleas that wil aton for such wretch as thi ! let me nev see eith on or the oth again ! '' yet the misery , for which year of happy wer to off no compens , receiv soon afterward mat reliev , from observ how much the beauty of her sist re-kindled the admir of her form lov . when first he cam in , he had spok to her but littl ; but every fiv minut seem to be giv her mor of his at . he found her as handsom as she had been last year ; as good nat , and as unaffect , though not quit so chatty . jan was anxy that no diff should be perceiv in her at al , and was real persuad that she talk as much as ev . but her mind was so busy eng , that she did not alway know when she was sil . when the gentlem ros to go away , mrs. bennet was mind of her intend civil , and they wer invit and eng to din at longbourn in a few day tim . `` you ar quit a visit in my debt , mr. bingley , '' she ad , `` for when you went to town last wint , you prom to tak a famy din with us , as soon as you return . i hav not forgot , you see ; and i ass you , i was very much disappoint that you did not com back and keep yo eng . '' bingley look a littl sil at thi reflect , and said someth of his concern at hav been prev by busy . they then went away . mrs. bennet had been strongly inclin to ask them to stay and din ther that day ; but , though she alway kept a very good tabl , she did not think anyth less than two cours could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxy design , or satisfy the appetit and prid of on who had ten thousand a year . chapt 54 as soon as they wer gon , elizabe walk out to recov her spirit ; or in oth word , to dwel without interrupt on thos subject that must dead them mor . mr. darcy 's behavio aston and vex her . `` why , if he cam on to be sil , grav , and indiff , '' said she , `` did he com at al ? '' she could settl it in no way that gav her pleas . `` he could be stil amy , stil pleas , to my unc and aunt , when he was in town ; and why not to me ? if he fear me , why com hith ? if he no long car for me , why sil ? teas , teas , man ! i wil think no mor about him . '' her resolv was for a short tim involunt kept by the approach of her sist , who join her with a che look , which show her bet satisfy with their visit , than elizabe . `` now , '' said she , `` that thi first meet is ov , i feel perfect easy . i know my own strength , and i shal nev be embarrass again by his com . i am glad he din her on tuesday . it wil then be publ seen that , on both sid , we meet on as common and indiff acquaint . '' `` ye , very indiff indee , '' said elizabe , laugh . `` oh , jan , tak car . '' `` my dear lizzy , you can not think me so weak , as to be in dang now ? '' `` i think you ar in very gre dang of mak him as much in lov with you as ev . '' they did not see the gentlem again til tuesday ; and mrs. bennet , in the meanwhil , was giv way to al the happy schemes , which the good humo and common polit of bingley , in half an hour 's visit , had rev . on tuesday ther was a larg party assembl at longbourn ; and the two who wer most anxy expect , to the credit of their punct as sportsm , wer in very good tim . when they repair to the dining-room , elizabe eag watch to see wheth bingley would tak the plac , which , in al their form party , had belong to him , by her sist . her prud moth , occupy by the sam idea , forb to invit him to sit by herself . on ent the room , he seem to hesit ; but jan hap to look round , and hap to smil : it was decid . he plac himself by her . elizabe , with a triumph sens , look toward his friend . he bor it with nobl indiff , and she would hav imagin that bingley had receiv his sanct to be happy , had she not seen his ey likew turn toward mr. darcy , with an express of half-laughing alarm . his behavio to her sist was such , dur din tim , as show an admir of her , which , though mor guard than form , persuad elizabe , that if left whol to himself , jan 's happy , and his own , would be speedy sec . though she dar not depend upon the consequ , she yet receiv pleas from observ his behavio . it gav her al the anim that her spirit could boast ; for she was in no che humo . mr. darcy was almost as far from her as the tabl could divid them . he was on on sid of her moth . she knew how littl such a situ would giv pleas to eith , or mak eith appear to adv . she was not near enough to hear any of their discours , but she could see how seldom they spok to each oth , and how form and cold was their man whenev they did . her moth 's ungr , mad the sens of what they ow him mor pain to elizabe 's mind ; and she would , at tim , hav giv anyth to be privileg to tel him that his kind was neith unknown nor unfelt by the whol of the famy . she was in hop that the ev would afford som opportun of bring them togeth ; that the whol of the visit would not pass away without en them to ent into someth mor of convers than the mer ceremony salut attend his ent . anxy and uneasy , the period which pass in the drawing-room , bef the gentlem cam , was wearisom and dul to a degr that almost mad her uncivil . she look forward to their ent as the point on which al her chant of pleas for the ev must depend . `` if he doe not com to me , then , '' said she , `` i shal giv him up for ev . '' the gentlem cam ; and she thought he look as if he would hav answ her hop ; but , ala ! the lady had crowd round the tabl , wher miss bennet was mak tea , and elizabe pour out the coff , in so clos a conf that ther was not a singl vac near her which would admit of a chair . and on the gentlem 's approach , on of the girl mov clos to her than ev , and said , in a whisp : '' the men sha n't com and part us , i am determin . we want non of them ; do we ? '' darcy had walk away to anoth part of the room . she follow him with her ey , envy everyon to whom he spok , had scarc paty enough to help anybody to coff ; and then was enr against herself for being so sil ! `` a man who has ont been refus ! how could i ev be fool enough to expect a renew of his lov ? is ther on among the sex , who would not protest against such a weak as a second propos to the sam wom ? ther is no indign so abhor to their feel ! '' she was a littl rev , howev , by his bring back his coff cup himself ; and she seiz the opportun of say : '' is yo sist at pemberley stil ? '' `` ye , she wil remain ther til christmas . '' `` and quit alon ? hav al her friend left her ? '' `` mrs. annesley is with her . the oth hav been gon on to scarborough , thes three week . '' she could think of noth mor to say ; but if he wish to convers with her , he might hav bet success . he stood by her , howev , for som minut , in sil ; and , at last , on the young lady 's whisp to elizabe again , he walk away . when the tea-things wer remov , and the card-tables plac , the lady al ros , and elizabe was then hop to be soon join by him , when al her view wer overthrown by see him fal a victim to her moth 's rapac for whist play , and in a few mom aft seat with the rest of the party . she now lost every expect of pleas . they wer confin for the ev at diff tabl , and she had noth to hop , but that his ey wer so oft turn toward her sid of the room , as to mak him play as unsuccess as herself . mrs. bennet had design to keep the two netherfield gentlem to sup ; but their carry was unlucky ord bef any of the oth , and she had no opportun of detain them . `` wel girl , '' said she , as soon as they wer left to themselv , `` what say you to the day ? i think every thing has pass off uncommon wel , i ass you . the din was as wel dress as any i ev saw . the venison was roast to a turn—and everybody said they nev saw so fat a haunch . the soup was fifty tim bet than what we had at the lucas ' last week ; and ev mr. darcy acknowledg , that the partridg wer remark wel don ; and i suppos he has two or three french cook at least . and , my dear jan , i nev saw you look in gre beauty . mrs. long said so too , for i ask her wheth you did not . and what do you think she said besid ? 'ah ! mrs. bennet , we shal hav her at netherfield at last . ' she did indee . i do think mrs. long is as good a cre as ev lived—and her niec ar very pretty behav girl , and not at al handsom : i lik them prodigy . '' mrs. bennet , in short , was in very gre spirit ; she had seen enough of bingley 's behavio to jan , to be convint that she would get him at last ; and her expect of adv to her famy , when in a happy humo , wer so far beyond reason , that she was quit disappoint at not see him ther again the next day , to mak his propos . `` it has been a very agr day , '' said miss bennet to elizabe . `` the party seem so wel select , so suit on with the oth . i hop we may oft meet again . '' elizabe smil . `` lizzy , you must not do so . you must not suspect me . it mort me . i ass you that i hav now learnt to enjoy his convers as an agr and sens young man , without hav a wish beyond it . i am perfect satisfy , from what his man now ar , that he nev had any design of eng my affect . it is on that he is bless with gre sweet of address , and a stronger desir of gen pleas , than any oth man . '' `` you ar very cruel , '' said her sist , `` you wil not let me smil , and ar provok me to it every mom . '' `` how hard it is in som cas to be believ ! '' `` and how imposs in oth ! '' `` but why should you wish to persuad me that i feel mor than i acknowledg ? '' `` that is a quest which i hard know how to answ . we al lov to instruct , though we can teach on what is not wor know . forg me ; and if you persist in indiff , do not mak me yo confid . '' chapt 55 a few day aft thi visit , mr. bingley cal again , and alon . his friend had left him that morn for london , but was to return hom in ten day tim . he sat with them abov an hour , and was in remark good spirit . mrs. bennet invit him to din with them ; but , with many express of concern , he confess himself eng elsewh . `` next tim you cal , '' said she , `` i hop we shal be mor lucky . '' he should be particul happy at any tim , etc . etc . ; and if she would giv him leav , would tak an ear opportun of wait on them . `` can you com to-morrow ? '' ye , he had no eng at al for to-morrow ; and her invit was acceiv with alacr . he cam , and in such very good tim that the lady wer non of them dress . in ran mrs. bennet to her daught 's room , in her dress gown , and with her hair half fin , cry out : '' my dear jan , mak hast and hurry down . he is come—mr . bingley is com . he is , indee . mak hast , mak hast . her , sarah , com to miss bennet thi mom , and help her on with her gown . nev mind miss lizzy 's hair . '' `` we wil be down as soon as we can , '' said jan ; `` but i dar say kitty is forward than eith of us , for she went up stair half an hour ago . '' `` oh ! hang kitty ! what has she to do with it ? com be quick , be quick ! wher is yo sash , my dear ? '' but when her moth was gon , jan would not be prevail on to go down without on of her sist . the sam anxy to get them by themselv was vis again in the ev . aft tea , mr. bennet retir to the libr , as was his custom , and mary went up stair to her instru . two obstac of the fiv being thu remov , mrs. bennet sat look and wink at elizabe and catherin for a consid tim , without mak any impress on them . elizabe would not observ her ; and when at last kitty did , she very innoc said , `` what is the mat mamm ? what do you keep wink at me for ? what am i to do ? '' `` noth child , noth . i did not wink at you . '' she then sat stil fiv minut long ; but un to wast such a precy occas , she sud got up , and say to kitty , `` com her , my lov , i want to speak to you , '' took her out of the room . jan inst gav a look at elizabe which spok her distress at such premedit , and her entreaty that she would not giv in to it . in a few minut , mrs. bennet half-opened the door and cal out : '' lizzy , my dear , i want to speak with you . '' elizabe was forc to go . `` we may as wel leav them by themselv you know ; '' said her moth , as soon as she was in the hal . `` kitty and i ar going up stair to sit in my dressing-room . '' elizabe mad no attempt to reason with her moth , but remain quiet in the hal , til she and kitty wer out of sight , then return into the drawing-room . mrs. bennet 's schemes for thi day wer ineffect . bingley was every thing that was charm , exceiv the profess lov of her daught . his eas and che rend him a most agr addit to their ev party ; and he bor with the ill-judged officy of the moth , and heard al her sil remark with a forbear and command of count particul grat to the daught . he scarc nee an invit to stay sup ; and bef he went away , an eng was form , chief through his own and mrs. bennet 's mean , for his com next morn to shoot with her husband . aft thi day , jan said no mor of her indiff . not a word pass between the sist concern bingley ; but elizabe went to bed in the happy believ that al must speedy be conclud , unless mr. darcy return within the stat tim . sery , howev , she felt tol persuad that al thi must hav tak plac with that gentlem 's concur . bingley was punct to his appoint ; and he and mr. bennet spent the morn togeth , as had been agree on . the lat was much mor agr than his comp expect . ther was noth of presum or fol in bingley that could provok his ridic , or disgust him into sil ; and he was mor commun , and less ecc , than the oth had ev seen him . bingley of cours return with him to din ; and in the ev mrs. bennet 's inv was again at work to get every body away from him and her daught . elizabe , who had a let to writ , went into the breakfast room for that purpos soon aft tea ; for as the oth wer al going to sit down to card , she could not be want to counteract her moth 's schemes . but on return to the drawing-room , when her let was fin , she saw , to her infinit surpr , ther was reason to fear that her moth had been too ingeny for her . on op the door , she perceiv her sist and bingley stand togeth ov the hear , as if eng in earnest convers ; and had thi led to no susp , the fac of both , as they hasty turn round and mov away from each oth , would hav told it al . their situ was awkward enough ; but her she thought was stil wors . not a syl was ut by eith ; and elizabe was on the point of going away again , when bingley , who as wel as the oth had sat down , sud ros , and whisp a few word to her sist , ran out of the room . jan could hav no reserv from elizabe , wher confid would giv pleas ; and inst embrac her , acknowledg , with the liveliest emot , that she was the happiest cre in the world . `` 't is too much ! '' she ad , `` by far too much . i do not deserv it . oh ! why is not everybody as happy ? '' elizabe 's congrat wer giv with a sint , a warm , a delight , which word could but poor express . every sent of kind was a fresh sourc of happy to jan . but she would not allow herself to stay with her sist , or say half that remain to be said for the pres . `` i must go inst to my moth ; '' she cri . `` i would not on any account trifl with her affect solicitud ; or allow her to hear it from anyon but myself . he is gon to my fath already . oh ! lizzy , to know that what i hav to rel wil giv such pleas to al my dear famy ! how shal i bear so much happy ! '' she then hast away to her moth , who had purpos brok up the card party , and was sit up stair with kitty . elizabe , who was left by herself , now smil at the rapid and eas with which an affair was fin settl , that had giv them so many prevy month of suspens and vex . `` and thi , '' said she , `` is the end of al his friend 's anxy circumspect ! of al his sist 's fals and cont ! the happiest , wisest , most reason end ! '' in a few minut she was join by bingley , whos conf with her fath had been short and to the purpos . `` wher is yo sist ? '' said he hasty , as he op the door . `` with my moth up stair . she wil be down in a mom , i dar say . '' he then shut the door , and , com up to her , claim the good wish and affect of a sist . elizabe honest and hearty express her delight in the prospect of their rel . they shook hand with gre cord ; and then , til her sist cam down , she had to list to al he had to say of his own happy , and of jan 's perfect ; and in spit of his being a lov , elizabe real believ al his expect of fel to be rat found , becaus they had for bas the excel understand , and super-excellent disposit of jan , and a gen simil of feel and tast between her and himself . it was an ev of no common delight to them al ; the satisfact of miss bennet 's mind gav a glow of such sweet anim to her fac , as mad her look handsom than ev . kitty simp and smil , and hop her turn was com soon . mrs. bennet could not giv her cons or speak her approb in term warm enough to satisfy her feel , though she talk to bingley of noth els for half an hour ; and when mr. bennet join them at sup , his voic and man plain show how real happy he was . not a word , howev , pass his lip in allud to it , til their visit took his leav for the night ; but as soon as he was gon , he turn to his daught , and said : '' jan , i congrat you . you wil be a very happy wom . '' jan went to him inst , kiss him , and thank him for his good . `` you ar a good girl ; '' he reply , `` and i hav gre pleas in think you wil be so happy settl . i hav not a doubt of yo doing very wel togeth . yo temp ar by no mean unlik . you ar each of you so comply , that noth wil ev be resolv on ; so easy , that every serv wil che you ; and so gen , that you wil alway excess yo incom . '' `` i hop not so . imprud or thoughtless in money mat would be unpardon in me . '' `` excess their incom ! my dear mr. bennet , '' cri his wif , `` what ar you talk of ? why , he has four or fiv thousand a year , and very lik mor . '' then address her daught , `` oh ! my dear , dear jan , i am so happy ! i am sur i sha n't get a wink of sleep al night . i knew how it would be . i alway said it must be so , at last . i was sur you could not be so beauty for noth ! i rememb , as soon as ev i saw him , when he first cam into hertfordshir last year , i thought how lik it was that you should com togeth . oh ! he is the handsomest young man that ev was seen ! '' wickham , lyd , wer al forgot . jan was beyond competit her favourit child . at that mom , she car for no oth . her young sist soon beg to mak interest with her for object of happy which she might in fut be abl to dispens . mary petit for the us of the libr at netherfield ; and kitty beg very hard for a few bal ther every wint . bingley , from thi tim , was of cours a dai visit at longbourn ; com frequ bef breakfast , and alway remain til aft sup ; unless when som barb neighbo , who could not be enough detest , had giv him an invit to din which he thought himself oblig to acceiv . elizabe had now but littl tim for convers with her sist ; for whil he was pres , jan had no at to bestow on anyon els ; but she found herself consid us to both of them in thos hour of sep that must sometim occ . in the abs of jan , he alway attach himself to elizabe , for the pleas of talk of her ; and when bingley was gon , jan const sought the sam mean of reliev . `` he has mad me so happy , '' said she , on ev , `` by tel me that he was tot ign of my being in town last spring ! i had not believ it poss . '' `` i suspect as much , '' reply elizabe . `` but how did he account for it ? '' `` it must hav been his sist 's doing . they wer certain no friend to his acquaint with me , which i can not wond at , sint he might hav chos so much mor adv in many respect . but when they see , as i trust they wil , that their broth is happy with me , they wil learn to be cont , and we shal be on good term again ; though we can nev be what we ont wer to each oth . '' `` that is the most unforg speech , '' said elizabe , `` that i ev heard you ut . good girl ! it would vex me , indee , to see you again the dup of miss bingley 's pretend regard . '' `` would you believ it , lizzy , that when he went to town last novemb , he real lov me , and noth but a persuas of my being indiff would hav prev his com down again ! '' `` he mad a littl mistak to be sur ; but it is to the credit of his modesty . '' thi nat introduc a panegyr from jan on his diffid , and the littl valu he put on his own good qual . elizabe was pleas to find that he had not betray the interf of his friend ; for , though jan had the most gen and forg heart in the world , she knew it was a circumst which must prejud her against him . `` i am certain the most fortun cre that ev ex ! '' cri jan . `` oh ! lizzy , why am i thu singl from my famy , and bless abov them al ! if i could but see you as happy ! if ther wer but such anoth man for you ! '' `` if you wer to giv me forty such men , i nev could be so happy as you . til i hav yo disposit , yo good , i nev can hav yo happy . no , no , let me shift for myself ; and , perhap , if i hav very good luck , i may meet with anoth mr. collin in tim . '' the situ of affair in the longbourn famy could not be long a secret . mrs. bennet was privileg to whisp it to mrs. phillip , and she vent , without any permit , to do the sam by al her neighbo in meryton . the bennet wer speedy pronount to be the luckiest famy in the world , though on a few week bef , when lyd had first run away , they had been gen prov to be mark out for misfortun . chapt 56 on morn , about a week aft bingley 's eng with jan had been form , as he and the fem of the famy wer sit togeth in the dining-room , their at was sud drawn to the window , by the sound of a carry ; and they perceiv a cha and four driv up the lawn . it was too ear in the morn for visit , and besid , the equip did not answ to that of any of their neighbo . the hors wer post ; and neith the carry , nor the livery of the serv who prec it , wer famili to them . as it was certain , howev , that somebody was com , bingley inst prevail on miss bennet to avoid the confin of such an intrud , and walk away with him into the shrubbery . they both set off , and the conject of the remain three continu , though with littl satisfact , til the door was thrown op and their visit ent . it was lady catherin de bourgh . they wer of cours al intend to be surpr ; but their aston was beyond their expect ; and on the part of mrs. bennet and kitty , though she was perfect unknown to them , ev infery to what elizabe felt . she ent the room with an air mor than us ungr , mad no oth reply to elizabe 's salut than a slight inclin of the head , and sat down without say a word . elizabe had ment her nam to her moth on her lady 's ent , though no request of introduc had been mad . mrs. bennet , al amaz , though flat by hav a guest of such high import , receiv her with the utmost polit . aft sit for a mom in sil , she said very stiff to elizabe , '' i hop you ar wel , miss bennet . that lady , i suppos , is yo moth . '' elizabe reply very cont that she was . `` and that i suppos is on of yo sist . '' `` ye , madam , '' said mrs. bennet , delight to speak to lady catherin . `` she is my youngest girl but on . my youngest of al is lat marry , and my eldest is somewh about the ground , walk with a young man who , i believ , wil soon becom a part of the famy . '' `` you hav a very smal park her , '' return lady catherin aft a short sil . `` it is noth in comparison of ros , my lady , i dar say ; but i ass you it is much larg than sir william luca 's . '' `` thi must be a most inconveny sit room for the ev , in sum ; the window ar ful west . '' mrs. bennet ass her that they nev sat ther aft din , and then ad : '' may i tak the liberty of ask yo lady wheth you left mr. and mrs. collin wel . '' `` ye , very wel . i saw them the night bef last . '' elizabe now expect that she would produc a let for her from charlot , as it seem the on prob mot for her cal . but no let appear , and she was complet puzzl . mrs. bennet , with gre civil , beg her lady to tak som refresh ; but lady catherin very resolv , and not very polit , declin eat anyth ; and then , ris up , said to elizabe , '' miss bennet , ther seem to be a pretty kind of a littl wild on on sid of yo lawn . i should be glad to tak a turn in it , if you wil favo me with yo company . '' `` go , my dear , '' cri her moth , `` and show her lady about the diff walk . i think she wil be pleas with the hermit . '' elizabe obey , and run into her own room for her parasol , attend her nobl guest downstair . as they pass through the hal , lady catherin op the door into the dining-parlour and drawing-room , and pronount them , aft a short survey , to be dec look room , walk on . her carry remain at the door , and elizabe saw that her waiting-woman was in it . they process in sil along the gravel walk that led to the cops ; elizabe was determin to mak no effort for convers with a wom who was now mor than us insol and disagr . `` how could i ev think her lik her nephew ? '' said she , as she look in her fac . as soon as they ent the cops , lady catherin beg in the follow man : — '' you can be at no loss , miss bennet , to understand the reason of my journey hith . yo own heart , yo own conscy , must tel you why i com . '' elizabe look with unaffect aston . `` indee , you ar mistak , madam . i hav not been at al abl to account for the hono of see you her . '' `` miss bennet , '' reply her lady , in an angry ton , `` you ought to know , that i am not to be trifl with . but howev insint you may choos to be , you shal not find me so . my charact has ev been celebr for it sint and frank , and in a caus of such mom as thi , i shal certain not depart from it . a report of a most alarm nat reach me two day ago . i was told that not on yo sist was on the point of being most adv marry , but that you , that miss elizabe bennet , would , in al lik , be soon afterward unit to my nephew , my own nephew , mr. darcy . though i know it must be a scand fals , though i would not ind him so much as to suppos the tru of it poss , i inst resolv on set off for thi plac , that i might mak my senty known to you . '' `` if you believ it imposs to be tru , '' said elizabe , colo with aston and disdain , `` i wond you took the troubl of com so far . what could yo lady propos by it ? '' `` at ont to insist upon hav such a report univers contradict . '' `` yo com to longbourn , to see me and my famy , '' said elizabe cool , `` wil be rath a confirm of it ; if , indee , such a report is in ex . '' `` if ! do you then pretend to be ign of it ? has it not been industry circ by yourselv ? do you not know that such a report is spread abroad ? '' `` i nev heard that it was . '' `` and can you likew decl , that ther is no found for it ? '' `` i do not pretend to possess eq frank with yo lady . you may ask quest which i shal not choos to answ . '' `` thi is not to be born . miss bennet , i insist on being satisfy . has he , has my nephew , mad you an off of marry ? '' `` yo lady has decl it to be imposs . '' `` it ought to be so ; it must be so , whil he retain the us of his reason . but yo art and al may , in a mom of infatu , hav mad him forget what he ow to himself and to al his famy . you may hav drawn him in . '' `` if i hav , i shal be the last person to confess it . '' `` miss bennet , do you know who i am ? i hav not been accustom to such langu as thi . i am almost the nearest rel he has in the world , and am entitl to know al his dearest concern . '' `` but you ar not entitl to know min ; nor wil such behavio as thi , ev induc me to be explicit . '' `` let me be right understood . thi match , to which you hav the presum to aspir , can nev tak plac . no , nev . mr. darcy is eng to my daught . now what hav you to say ? '' `` on thi ; that if he is so , you can hav no reason to suppos he wil mak an off to me . '' lady catherin hesit for a mom , and then reply : '' the eng between them is of a peculi kind . from their inf , they hav been intend for each oth . it was the favourit wish of his moth , as wel as of her . whil in their cradl , we plan the un : and now , at the mom when the wish of both sist would be accompl in their marry , to be prev by a young wom of infery bir , of no import in the world , and whol un to the famy ! do you pay no regard to the wish of his friend ? to his tacit eng with miss de bourgh ? ar you lost to every feel of propry and del ? hav you not heard me say that from his earliest hour he was destin for his cousin ? '' `` ye , and i had heard it bef . but what is that to me ? if ther is no oth object to my marry yo nephew , i shal certain not be kept from it by know that his moth and aunt wish him to marry miss de bourgh . you both did as much as you could in plan the marry . it complet depend on oth . if mr. darcy is neith by hono nor inclin confin to his cousin , why is not he to mak anoth cho ? and if i am that cho , why may not i acceiv him ? '' `` becaus hono , decor , prud , nay , interest , forbid it . ye , miss bennet , interest ; for do not expect to be not by his famy or friend , if you wil act against the inclin of al . you wil be cens , slight , and desp , by everyon connect with him . yo al wil be a disgrac ; yo nam wil nev ev be ment by any of us . '' `` thes ar heavy misfortun , '' reply elizabe . `` but the wif of mr. darcy must hav such extraordin sourc of happy necess attach to her situ , that she could , upon the whol , hav no caus to repin . '' `` obstin , headstrong girl ! i am asham of you ! is thi yo gratitud for my at to you last spring ? is noth due to me on that scor ? let us sit down . you ar to understand , miss bennet , that i cam her with the determin resolv of carry my purpos ; nor wil i be dissuad from it . i hav not been us to submit to any person 's whim . i hav not been in the habit of brook disappoint . '' `` that wil mak yo lady 's situ at pres mor pity ; but it wil hav no effect on me . '' `` i wil not be interrupt . hear me in sil . my daught and my nephew ar form for each oth . they ar descend , on the matern sid , from the sam nobl lin ; and , on the fath 's , from respect , hono , and ancient—though untitled—families . their fortun on both sid is splendid . they ar destin for each oth by the voic of every memb of their respect hous ; and what is to divid them ? the upstart pretend of a young wom without famy , connect , or fortun . is thi to be end ! but it must not , shal not be . if you wer sens of yo own good , you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you hav been brought up . '' `` in marry yo nephew , i should not consid myself as quit that sphere . he is a gentlem ; i am a gentlem 's daught ; so far we ar eq . '' `` tru . you ar a gentlem 's daught . but who was yo moth ? who ar yo unc and aunt ? do not imagin me ign of their condit . '' `` whatev my connect may be , '' said elizabe , `` if yo nephew doe not object to them , they can be noth to you . '' `` tel me ont for al , ar you eng to him ? '' though elizabe would not , for the mer purpos of oblig lady catherin , hav answ thi quest , she could not but say , aft a mom 's delib : '' i am not . '' lady catherin seem pleas . `` and wil you prom me , nev to ent into such an eng ? '' `` i wil mak no prom of the kind . '' `` miss bennet i am shock and aston . i expect to find a mor reason young wom . but do not deceiv yourself into a believ that i wil ev rec . i shal not go away til you hav giv me the ass i requir . '' `` and i certain nev shal giv it . i am not to be intimid into anyth so whol unreason . yo lady want mr. darcy to marry yo daught ; but would my giv you the wished-for prom mak their marry at al mor prob ? suppos him to be attach to me , would my refus to acceiv his hand mak him wish to bestow it on his cousin ? allow me to say , lady catherin , that the argu with which you hav support thi extraordin apply hav been as frivol as the apply was ill-judged . you hav wid mistak my charact , if you think i can be work on by such persuas as thes . how far yo nephew might approv of yo interf in his affair , i can not tel ; but you hav certain no right to concern yourself in min . i must beg , theref , to be importun no farth on the subject . '' `` not so hasty , if you pleas . i hav by no mean don . to al the object i hav already urg , i hav stil anoth to ad . i am no stranger to the particul of yo youngest sist 's infam elop . i know it al ; that the young man 's marry her was a patched-up busy , at the exp of yo fath and unc . and is such a girl to be my nephew 's sist ? is her husband , is the son of his lat fath 's steward , to be his broth ? heav and ear ! —of what ar you think ? ar the shad of pemberley to be thu pollut ? '' `` you can now hav noth furth to say , '' she res answ . `` you hav insult me in every poss method . i must beg to return to the hous . '' and she ros as she spok . lady catherin ros also , and they turn back . her lady was high incens . `` you hav no regard , then , for the hono and credit of my nephew ! unfeel , self girl ! do you not consid that a connect with you must disgrac him in the ey of everybody ? '' `` lady catherin , i hav noth furth to say . you know my senty . '' `` you ar then resolv to hav him ? '' `` i hav said no such thing . i am on resolv to act in that man , which wil , in my own opin , constitut my happy , without ref to you , or to any person so whol unconnect with me . '' `` it is wel . you refus , then , to oblig me . you refus to obey the claim of duty , hono , and gratitud . you ar determin to ruin him in the opin of al his friend , and mak him the contempt of the world . '' `` neith duty , nor hono , nor gratitud , '' reply elizabe , `` hav any poss claim on me , in the pres inst . no principl of eith would be viol by my marry with mr. darcy . and with regard to the res of his famy , or the indign of the world , if the form wer excit by his marry me , it would not giv me on mom 's concern—and the world in gen would hav too much sens to join in the scorn . '' `` and thi is yo real opin ! thi is yo fin resolv ! very wel . i shal now know how to act . do not imagin , miss bennet , that yo ambit wil ev be grat . i cam to try you . i hop to find you reason ; but , depend upon it , i wil carry my point . '' in thi man lady catherin talk on , til they wer at the door of the carry , when , turn hasty round , she ad , `` i tak no leav of you , miss bennet . i send no comply to yo moth . you deserv no such at . i am most sery displeas . '' elizabe mad no answ ; and without attempt to persuad her lady to return into the hous , walk quiet into it herself . she heard the carry driv away as she process up stair . her moth impaty met her at the door of the dressing-room , to ask why lady catherin would not com in again and rest herself . `` she did not choos it , '' said her daught , `` she would go . '' `` she is a very fine-looking wom ! and her cal her was prodigy civil ! for she on cam , i suppos , to tel us the collins wer wel . she is on her road somewh , i dar say , and so , pass through meryton , thought she might as wel cal on you . i suppos she had noth particul to say to you , lizzy ? '' elizabe was forc to giv into a littl fals her ; for to acknowledg the subst of their convers was imposs . chapt 57 the discompos of spirit which thi extraordin visit threw elizabe into , could not be easy overcom ; nor could she , for many hour , learn to think of it less than incess . lady catherin , it appear , had act tak the troubl of thi journey from ros , for the sol purpos of break off her suppos eng with mr. darcy . it was a rat scheme , to be sur ! but from what the report of their eng could origin , elizabe was at a loss to imagin ; til she recollect that his being the intim friend of bingley , and her being the sist of jan , was enough , at a tim when the expect of on wed mad everybody eag for anoth , to supply the ide . she had not herself forgot to feel that the marry of her sist must bring them mor frequ togeth . and her neighbo at luca lodg , theref ( for through their commun with the collins , the report , she conclud , had reach lady catherin ) , had on set that down as almost certain and immedy , which she had look forward to as poss at som fut tim . in revolv lady catherin 's express , howev , she could not help feel som uneasy as to the poss consequ of her persist in thi interf . from what she had said of her resolv to prev their marry , it occur to elizabe that she must medit an apply to her nephew ; and how he might tak a simil repres of the evil attach to a connect with her , she dar not pronount . she knew not the exact degr of his affect for his aunt , or his depend on her judg , but it was nat to suppos that he thought much high of her lady than she could do ; and it was certain that , in enum the misery of a marry with on , whos immedy connect wer so uneq to his own , his aunt would address him on his weakest sid . with his not of dign , he would prob feel that the argu , which to elizabe had appear weak and ridic , contain much good sens and solid reason . if he had been wav bef as to what he should do , which had oft seem lik , the adv and entreaty of so near a rel might settl every doubt , and determin him at ont to be as happy as dign unblem could mak him . in that cas he would return no mor . lady catherin might see him in her way through town ; and his eng to bingley of com again to netherfield must giv way . `` if , theref , an excus for not keep his prom should com to his friend within a few day , '' she ad , `` i shal know how to understand it . i shal then giv ov every expect , every wish of his const . if he is satisfy with on regret me , when he might hav obtain my affect and hand , i shal soon ceas to regret him at al . '' the surpr of the rest of the famy , on hear who their visit had been , was very gre ; but they oblig satisfy it , with the sam kind of supposit which had appeas mrs. bennet 's curios ; and elizabe was spar from much teas on the subject . the next morn , as she was going downstair , she was met by her fath , who cam out of his libr with a let in his hand . `` lizzy , '' said he , `` i was going to look for you ; com into my room . '' she follow him thith ; and her curios to know what he had to tel her was height by the supposit of it being in som man connect with the let he held . it sud struck her that it might be from lady catherin ; and she anticip with dismay al the consequ expl . she follow her fath to the fir plac , and they both sat down . he then said , '' i hav receiv a let thi morn that has aston me excess . as it princip concern yourself , you ought to know it cont . i did not know bef , that i had two daught on the brink of matrimony . let me congrat you on a very import conquest . '' the colo now rush into elizabe 's cheek in the inst convict of it being a let from the nephew , instead of the aunt ; and she was undetermin wheth most to be pleas that he explain himself at al , or offend that his let was not rath address to herself ; when her fath continu : '' you look conscy . young lady hav gre penet in such mat as thes ; but i think i may defy ev yo sagac , to discov the nam of yo admir . thi let is from mr . collin . '' `` from mr. collin ! and what can he hav to say ? '' `` someth very much to the purpos of cours . he begin with congrat on the approach nupt of my eldest daught , of which , it seem , he has been told by som of the good-natur , gossip lucas . i shal not sport with yo impaty , by read what he say on that point . what rel to yourself , is as follow : 'having thu off you the sint congrat of mrs. collin and myself on thi happy ev , let me now ad a short hint on the subject of anoth ; of which we hav been advert by the sam auth . yo daught elizabe , it is presum , wil not long bear the nam of bennet , aft her eld sist has resign it , and the chos partn of her fat may be reason look up to as on of the most illustry person in thi land . ' `` can you poss guess , lizzy , who is meant by thi ? '' 'this young gentlem is bless , in a peculi way , with every thing the heart of mort can most desir , —splendid property , nobl kindr , and extend patron . yet in spit of al thes tempt , let me warn my cousin elizabe , and yourself , of what evil you may int by a precipit clos with thi gentlem 's propos , which , of cours , you wil be inclin to tak immedy adv of . ' `` hav you any ide , lizzy , who thi gentlem is ? but now it com out : '' 'my mot for caut you is as follow . we hav reason to imagin that his aunt , lady catherin de bourgh , doe not look on the match with a friend ey . ' `` mr. darcy , you see , is the man ! now , lizzy , i think i hav surpr you . could he , or the lucas , hav pitch on any man within the circ of our acquaint , whos nam would hav giv the lie mor effect to what they rel ? mr. darcy , who nev look at any wom but to see a blem , and who prob nev look at you in his lif ! it is admir ! '' elizabe tri to join in her fath 's pleasantry , but could on forc on most reluct smil . nev had his wit been direct in a man so littl agr to her . `` ar you not divert ? '' `` oh ! ye . pray read on . '' `` 'after ment the lik of thi marry to her lady last night , she immedy , with her us condescend , express what she felt on the occas ; when it becam app , that on the scor of som famy object on the part of my cousin , she would nev giv her cons to what she term so disgrac a match . i thought it my duty to giv the speediest intellig of thi to my cousin , that she and her nobl admir may be aw of what they ar about , and not run hasty into a marry which has not been prop sanct . ' mr. collin moreov ad , ' i am tru rejo that my cousin lyd 's sad busy has been so wel hush up , and am on concern that their liv togeth bef the marry took plac should be so gen known . i must not , howev , neglect the duty of my stat , or refrain from decl my amaz at hear that you receiv the young coupl into yo hous as soon as they wer marry . it was an enco of vic ; and had i been the rect of longbourn , i should very strenuously hav oppos it . you ought certain to forg them , as a christian , but nev to admit them in yo sight , or allow their nam to be ment in yo hear . ' that is his not of christian forg ! the rest of his let is on about his dear charlot 's situ , and his expect of a young olive-branch . but , lizzy , you look as if you did not enjoy it . you ar not going to be miss , i hop , and pretend to be affront at an idl report . for what do we liv , but to mak sport for our neighbo , and laugh at them in our turn ? '' `` oh ! '' cri elizabe , `` i am excess divert . but it is so strange ! '' `` yes—that is what mak it amus . had they fix on any oth man it would hav been noth ; but his perfect indiff , and yo point dislik , mak it so delight absurd ! much as i abomin writ , i would not giv up mr. collin 's correspond for any consid . nay , when i read a let of his , i can not help giv him the pref ev ov wickham , much as i valu the impud and hypocrisy of my son-in-law . and pray , lizzy , what said lady catherin about thi report ? did she cal to refus her cons ? '' to thi quest his daught reply on with a laugh ; and as it had been ask without the least susp , she was not distress by his rep it . elizabe had nev been mor at a loss to mak her feel appear what they wer not . it was necess to laugh , when she would rath hav cri . her fath had most cruel mort her , by what he said of mr. darcy 's indiff , and she could do noth but wond at such a want of penet , or fear that perhap , instead of his see too littl , she might hav fant too much . chapt 58 instead of receiv any such let of excus from his friend , as elizabe half expect mr. bingley to do , he was abl to bring darcy with him to longbourn bef many day had pass aft lady catherin 's visit . the gentlem ar ear ; and , bef mrs. bennet had tim to tel him of their hav seen his aunt , of which her daught sat in mom dread , bingley , who want to be alon with jan , propos their al walk out . it was agree to . mrs. bennet was not in the habit of walk ; mary could nev spar tim ; but the remain fiv set off togeth . bingley and jan , howev , soon allow the oth to outstrip them . they lag behind , whil elizabe , kitty , and darcy wer to entertain each oth . very littl was said by eith ; kitty was too much afraid of him to talk ; elizabe was secret form a desp resolv ; and perhap he might be doing the sam . they walk toward the lucas , becaus kitty wish to cal upon mar ; and as elizabe saw no occas for mak it a gen concern , when kitty left them she went bold on with him alon . now was the mom for her resolv to be execut , and , whil her cour was high , she immedy said : '' mr. darcy , i am a very self cre ; and , for the sak of giv reliev to my own feel , car not how much i may be wound yo . i can no long help thank you for yo unexampl kind to my poor sist . ev sint i hav known it , i hav been most anxy to acknowledg to you how grat i feel it . wer it known to the rest of my famy , i should not hav mer my own gratitud to express . '' `` i am sorry , excess sorry , '' reply darcy , in a ton of surpr and emot , `` that you hav ev been inform of what may , in a mistak light , hav giv you uneasy . i did not think mrs. gardin was so littl to be trust . '' `` you must not blam my aunt . lyd 's thoughtless first betray to me that you had been concern in the mat ; and , of cours , i could not rest til i knew the particul . let me thank you again and again , in the nam of al my famy , for that gen compass which induc you to tak so much troubl , and bear so many mort , for the sak of discov them . '' `` if you wil thank me , '' he reply , `` let it be for yourself alon . that the wish of giv happy to you might ad forc to the oth induc which led me on , i shal not attempt to deny . but yo famy ow me noth . much as i respect them , i believ i thought on of you . '' elizabe was too much embarrass to say a word . aft a short paus , her comp ad , `` you ar too gen to trifl with me . if yo feel ar stil what they wer last april , tel me so at ont . my affect and wish ar unchang , but on word from you wil sil me on thi subject for ev . '' elizabe , feel al the mor than common awkward and anxy of his situ , now forc herself to speak ; and immedy , though not very flu , gav him to understand that her senty had undergon so mat a chang , sint the period to which he allud , as to mak her receiv with gratitud and pleas his pres ass . the happy which thi reply produc , was such as he had prob nev felt bef ; and he express himself on the occas as sens and as warm as a man viol in lov can be suppos to do . had elizabe been abl to encount his ey , she might hav seen how wel the express of heartfelt delight , diffus ov his fac , becam him ; but , though she could not look , she could list , and he told her of feel , which , in prov of what import she was to him , mad his affect every mom mor valu . they walk on , without know in what direct . ther was too much to be thought , and felt , and said , for at to any oth object . she soon learnt that they wer indebt for their pres good understand to the effort of his aunt , who did cal on him in her return through london , and ther rel her journey to longbourn , it mot , and the subst of her convers with elizabe ; dwel emph on every express of the lat which , in her lady 's apprehend , peculi denot her pervers and ass ; in the believ that such a rel must assist her endeavo to obtain that prom from her nephew which she had refus to giv . but , unlucky for her lady , it effect had been exact contrariw . `` it taught me to hop , '' said he , `` as i had scarc ev allow myself to hop bef . i knew enough of yo disposit to be certain that , had you been absolv , irrevoc decid against me , you would hav acknowledg it to lady catherin , frank and op . '' elizabe colo and laugh as she reply , `` ye , you know enough of my frank to believ me cap of that . aft abus you so abomin to yo fac , i could hav no scruple in abus you to al yo rel . '' `` what did you say of me , that i did not deserv ? for , though yo accus wer ill-founded , form on mistak prem , my behavio to you at the tim had merit the severest reproof . it was unpardon . i can not think of it without abhor . '' `` we wil not quarrel for the gre shar of blam annex to that ev , '' said elizabe . `` the conduc of neith , if strictly examin , wil be irreproach ; but sint then , we hav both , i hop , improv in civil . '' `` i can not be so easy reconcil to myself . the recollect of what i then said , of my conduc , my man , my express dur the whol of it , is now , and has been many month , inexpress pain to me . yo reproof , so wel apply , i shal nev forget : 'had you behav in a mor gentlemanlik man . ' thos wer yo word . you know not , you can scarc conceiv , how they hav tort me ; —though it was som tim , i confess , bef i was reason enough to allow their just . '' `` i was certain very far from expect them to mak so strong an impress . i had not the smallest ide of their being ev felt in such a way . '' `` i can easy believ it . you thought me then devoid of every prop feel , i am sur you did . the turn of yo count i shal nev forget , as you said that i could not hav address you in any poss way that would induc you to acceiv me . '' `` oh ! do not rep what i then said . thes recollect wil not do at al . i ass you that i hav long been most hearty asham of it . '' darcy ment his let . `` did it , '' said he , `` did it soon mak you think bet of me ? did you , on read it , giv any credit to it cont ? '' she explain what it effect on her had been , and how grad al her form prejud had been remov . `` i knew , '' said he , `` that what i wrot must giv you pain , but it was necess . i hop you hav destroy the let . ther was on part espec , the op of it , which i should dread yo hav the pow of read again . i can rememb som express which might just mak you hat me . '' `` the let shal certain be burnt , if you believ it ess to the preserv of my regard ; but , though we hav both reason to think my opin not entir unalt , they ar not , i hop , quit so easy chang as that imply . '' `` when i wrot that let , '' reply darcy , `` i believ myself perfect calm and cool , but i am sint convint that it was writ in a dread bit of spirit . '' `` the let , perhap , beg in bit , but it did not end so . the adieu is char itself . but think no mor of the let . the feel of the person who wrot , and the person who receiv it , ar now so wid diff from what they wer then , that every unpleas circumst attend it ought to be forgot . you must learn som of my philosoph . think on of the past as it remembr giv you pleas . '' `` i can not giv you credit for any philosoph of the kind . yo retrospect must be so tot void of reproach , that the cont ar from them is not of philosoph , but , what is much bet , of innoc . but with me , it is not so . pain recollect wil intrud which can not , which ought not , to be repel . i hav been a self being al my lif , in pract , though not in principl . as a child i was taught what was right , but i was not taught to correct my temp . i was giv good principl , but left to follow them in prid and conceit . unfortun an on son ( for many year an on child ) , i was spoilt by my par , who , though good themselv ( my fath , particul , al that was benevol and amy ) , allow , enco , almost taught me to be self and overbear ; to car for non beyond my own famy circ ; to think mean of al the rest of the world ; to wish at least to think mean of their sens and wor comp with my own . such i was , from eight to eight and twenty ; and such i might stil hav been but for you , dearest , loveliest elizabe ! what do i not ow you ! you taught me a lesson , hard indee at first , but most adv . by you , i was prop humbl . i cam to you without a doubt of my receiv . you show me how insufficy wer al my pretend to pleas a wom worthy of being pleas . '' `` had you then persuad yourself that i should ? '' `` indee i had . what wil you think of my van ? i believ you to be wish , expect my address . '' `` my man must hav been in fault , but not int , i ass you . i nev meant to deceiv you , but my spirit might oft lead me wrong . how you must hav hat me aft that ev ? '' `` hat you ! i was angry perhap at first , but my ang soon beg to tak a prop direct . '' `` i am almost afraid of ask what you thought of me , when we met at pemberley . you blam me for com ? '' `` no indee ; i felt noth but surpr . '' `` yo surpr could not be gre than min in being not by you . my conscy told me that i deserv no extraordin polit , and i confess that i did not expect to receiv mor than my due . '' `` my object then , '' reply darcy , `` was to show you , by every civil in my pow , that i was not so mean as to res the past ; and i hop to obtain yo forg , to less yo il opin , by let you see that yo reproof had been attend to . how soon any oth wish introduc themselv i can hard tel , but i believ in about half an hour aft i had seen you . '' he then told her of georgian 's delight in her acquaint , and of her disappoint at it sud interrupt ; which nat lead to the caus of that interrupt , she soon learnt that his resolv of follow her from derbyshir in quest of her sist had been form bef he quit the in , and that his grav and thought ther had ar from no oth struggles than what such a purpos must comprehend . she express her gratitud again , but it was too pain a subject to each , to be dwelt on farth . aft walk sev mil in a leis man , and too busy to know anyth about it , they found at last , on examin their watch , that it was tim to be at hom . `` what could becom of mr. bingley and jan ! '' was a wond which introduc the discuss of their affair . darcy was delight with their eng ; his friend had giv him the earliest inform of it . `` i must ask wheth you wer surpr ? '' said elizabe . `` not at al . when i went away , i felt that it would soon hap . '' `` that is to say , you had giv yo permit . i guess as much . '' and though he exclaim at the term , she found that it had been pretty much the cas . `` on the ev bef my going to london , '' said he , `` i mad a confess to him , which i believ i ought to hav mad long ago . i told him of al that had occur to mak my form interf in his affair absurd and impertin . his surpr was gre . he had nev had the slightest susp . i told him , moreov , that i believ myself mistak in suppos , as i had don , that yo sist was indiff to him ; and as i could easy perceiv that his attach to her was unab , i felt no doubt of their happy togeth . '' elizabe could not help smil at his easy man of direct his friend . `` did you speak from yo own observ , '' said she , `` when you told him that my sist lov him , or mer from my inform last spring ? '' `` from the form . i had narrow observ her dur the two visit which i had lat mad her ; and i was convint of her affect . '' `` and yo ass of it , i suppos , carry immedy convict to him . '' `` it did . bingley is most unaffect modest . his diffid had prev his depend on his own judg in so anxy a cas , but his rely on min mad every thing easy . i was oblig to confess on thing , which for a tim , and not unjust , offend him . i could not allow myself to cont that yo sist had been in town three month last wint , that i had known it , and purpos kept it from him . he was angry . but his ang , i am persuad , last no long than he remain in any doubt of yo sist 's senty . he has hearty forg me now . '' elizabe long to observ that mr. bingley had been a most delight friend ; so easy guid that his wor was invalu ; but she check herself . she rememb that he had yet to learn to be laugh at , and it was rath too ear to begin . in anticip the happy of bingley , which of cours was to be infery on to his own , he continu the convers til they reach the hous . in the hal they part . chapt 59 '' my dear lizzy , wher can you hav been walk to ? '' was a quest which elizabe receiv from jan as soon as she ent their room , and from al the oth when they sat down to tabl . she had on to say in reply , that they had wand about , til she was beyond her own knowledg . she colo as she spok ; but neith that , nor anyth els , awak a susp of the tru . the ev pass quiet , unmark by anyth extraordin . the acknowledg lov talk and laugh , the unacknowledg wer sil . darcy was not of a disposit in which happy overflow in mir ; and elizabe , agit and confus , rath knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so ; for , besid the immedy embarrass , ther wer oth evil bef her . she anticip what would be felt in the famy when her situ becam known ; she was aw that no on lik him but jan ; and ev fear that with the oth it was a dislik which not al his fortun and consequ might do away . at night she op her heart to jan . though susp was very far from miss bennet 's gen habit , she was absolv incred her . `` you ar jok , lizzy . thi can not be ! —engaged to mr. darcy ! no , no , you shal not deceiv me . i know it to be imposs . '' `` thi is a wretch begin indee ! my sol depend was on you ; and i am sur nobody els wil believ me , if you do not . yet , indee , i am in earnest . i speak noth but the tru . he stil lov me , and we ar eng . '' jan look at her doubt . `` oh , lizzy ! it can not be . i know how much you dislik him . '' `` you know noth of the mat . that is al to be forgot . perhap i did not alway lov him so wel as i do now . but in such cas as thes , a good mem is unpardon . thi is the last tim i shal ev rememb it myself . '' miss bennet stil look al amaz . elizabe again , and mor sery ass her of it tru . `` good heav ! can it be real so ! yet now i must believ you , '' cri jan . `` my dear , dear lizzy , i would—i do congrat you—but ar you certain ? forg the question—are you quit certain that you can be happy with him ? '' `` ther can be no doubt of that . it is settl between us already , that we ar to be the happiest coupl in the world . but ar you pleas , jan ? shal you lik to hav such a broth ? '' `` very , very much . noth could giv eith bingley or myself mor delight . but we consid it , we talk of it as imposs . and do you real lov him quit wel enough ? oh , lizzy ! do anyth rath than marry without affect . ar you quit sur that you feel what you ought to do ? '' `` oh , ye ! you wil on think i feel mor than i ought to do , when i tel you al . '' `` what do you mean ? '' `` why , i must confess that i lov him bet than i do bingley . i am afraid you wil be angry . '' `` my dearest sist , now be sery . i want to talk very sery . let me know every thing that i am to know , without delay . wil you tel me how long you hav lov him ? '' `` it has been com on so grad , that i hard know when it beg . but i believ i must dat it from my first see his beauty ground at pemberley . '' anoth entreaty that she would be sery , howev , produc the desir effect ; and she soon satisfy jan by her solemn ass of attach . when convint on that artic , miss bennet had noth furth to wish . `` now i am quit happy , '' said she , `` for you wil be as happy as myself . i alway had a valu for him . wer it for noth but his lov of you , i must alway hav esteem him ; but now , as bingley 's friend and yo husband , ther can be on bingley and yourself mor dear to me . but lizzy , you hav been very sly , very reserv with me . how littl did you tel me of what pass at pemberley and lambton ! i ow al that i know of it to anoth , not to you . '' elizabe told her the mot of her secrecy . she had been unwil to ment bingley ; and the unsettl stat of her own feel had mad her eq avoid the nam of his friend . but now she would no long cont from her his shar in lyd 's marry . al was acknowledg , and half the night spent in convers . `` good gracy ! '' cri mrs. bennet , as she stood at a window the next morn , `` if that disagr mr. darcy is not com her again with our dear bingley ! what can he mean by being so tiresom as to be alway com her ? i had no not but he would go a-shooting , or someth or oth , and not disturb us with his company . what shal we do with him ? lizzy , you must walk out with him again , that he may not be in bingley 's way . '' elizabe could hard help laugh at so conveny a propos ; yet was real vex that her moth should be alway giv him such an epithet . as soon as they ent , bingley look at her so express , and shook hand with such warm , as left no doubt of his good inform ; and he soon afterward said aloud , `` mrs. bennet , hav you no mor lan hereabout in which lizzy may los her way again to-day ? '' `` i adv mr. darcy , and lizzy , and kitty , '' said mrs. bennet , `` to walk to oakham mount thi morn . it is a nic long walk , and mr. darcy has nev seen the view . '' `` it may do very wel for the oth , '' reply mr. bingley ; `` but i am sur it wil be too much for kitty . wo n't it , kitty ? '' kitty own that she had rath stay at hom . darcy profess a gre curios to see the view from the mount , and elizabe sil cons . as she went up stair to get ready , mrs. bennet follow her , say : '' i am quit sorry , lizzy , that you should be forc to hav that disagr man al to yourself . but i hop you wil not mind it : it is al for jan 's sak , you know ; and ther is no occas for talk to him , exceiv just now and then . so , do not put yourself to inconveny . '' dur their walk , it was resolv that mr. bennet 's cons should be ask in the cours of the ev . elizabe reserv to herself the apply for her moth 's . she could not determin how her moth would tak it ; sometim doubt wheth al his weal and grand would be enough to overcom her abhor of the man . but wheth she wer viol set against the match , or viol delight with it , it was certain that her man would be eq il adapt to do credit to her sens ; and she could no mor bear that mr. darcy should hear the first rapt of her joy , than the first veh of her disapprob . in the ev , soon aft mr. bennet withdrew to the libr , she saw mr. darcy ris also and follow him , and her agit on see it was extrem . she did not fear her fath 's opposit , but he was going to be mad unhappy ; and that it should be through her means—that she , his favourit child , should be distress him by her cho , should be fil him with fear and regret in dispos of her—was a wretch reflect , and she sat in misery til mr. darcy appear again , when , look at him , she was a littl reliev by his smil . in a few minut he approach the tabl wher she was sit with kitty ; and , whil pretend to admir her work said in a whisp , `` go to yo fath , he want you in the libr . '' she was gon direct . her fath was walk about the room , look grav and anxy . `` lizzy , '' said he , `` what ar you doing ? ar you out of yo sens , to be acceiv thi man ? hav not you alway hat him ? '' how earnest did she then wish that her form opin had been mor reason , her express mor mod ! it would hav spar her from expl and profess which it was excess awkward to giv ; but they wer now necess , and she ass him , with som confus , of her attach to mr. darcy . `` or , in oth word , you ar determin to hav him . he is rich , to be sur , and you may hav mor fin cloth and fin carry than jan . but wil they mak you happy ? '' `` hav you any oth object , '' said elizabe , `` than yo believ of my indiff ? '' `` non at al . we al know him to be a proud , unpleas sort of man ; but thi would be noth if you real lik him . '' `` i do , i do lik him , '' she reply , with tear in her ey , `` i lov him . indee he has no improp prid . he is perfect amy . you do not know what he real is ; then pray do not pain me by speak of him in such term . '' `` lizzy , '' said her fath , `` i hav giv him my cons . he is the kind of man , indee , to whom i should nev dar refus anyth , which he condescend to ask . i now giv it to you , if you ar resolv on hav him . but let me adv you to think bet of it . i know yo disposit , lizzy . i know that you could be neith happy nor respect , unless you tru esteem yo husband ; unless you look up to him as a supery . yo liv tal would plac you in the greatest dang in an uneq marry . you could scarc escap discredit and misery . my child , let me not hav the grief of see you un to respect yo partn in lif . you know not what you ar about . '' elizabe , stil mor affect , was earnest and solemn in her reply ; and at leng , by rep ass that mr. darcy was real the object of her cho , by explain the grad chang which her estim of him had undergon , rel her absolv certainty that his affect was not the work of a day , but had stood the test of many month ' suspens , and enum with energy al his good qual , she did conqu her fath 's incred , and reconcil him to the match . `` wel , my dear , '' said he , when she ceas speak , `` i hav no mor to say . if thi be the cas , he deserv you . i could not hav part with you , my lizzy , to anyon less worthy . '' to complet the favo impress , she then told him what mr. darcy had volunt don for lyd . he heard her with aston . `` thi is an ev of wond , indee ! and so , darcy did every thing ; mad up the match , gav the money , paid the fellow 's debt , and got him his commit ! so much the bet . it wil sav me a world of troubl and econom . had it been yo unc 's doing , i must and would hav paid him ; but thes viol young lov carry every thing their own way . i shal off to pay him to-morrow ; he wil rant and storm about his lov for you , and ther wil be an end of the mat . '' he then recollect her embarrass a few day bef , on his read mr. collin 's let ; and aft laugh at her som tim , allow her at last to go—saying , as she quit the room , `` if any young men com for mary or kitty , send them in , for i am quit at leis . '' elizabe 's mind was now reliev from a very heavy weight ; and , aft half an hour 's quiet reflect in her own room , she was abl to join the oth with tol compos . every thing was too rec for gai , but the ev pass tranquil away ; ther was no long anyth mat to be dread , and the comfort of eas and famili would com in tim . when her moth went up to her dressing-room at night , she follow her , and mad the import commun . it effect was most extraordin ; for on first hear it , mrs. bennet sat quit stil , and un to ut a syl . nor was it und many , many minut that she could comprehend what she heard ; though not in gen backward to credit what was for the adv of her famy , or that cam in the shap of a lov to any of them . she beg at leng to recov , to fidget about in her chair , get up , sit down again , wond , and bless herself . `` good gracy ! lord bless me ! on think ! dear me ! mr. darcy ! who would hav thought it ! and is it real tru ? oh ! my sweetest lizzy ! how rich and how gre you wil be ! what pin-money , what jewel , what carry you wil hav ! jan 's is noth to it—nothing at al . i am so pleased—so happy . such a charm man ! —so handsom ! so tal ! —oh , my dear lizzy ! pray apolog for my hav dislik him so much bef . i hop he wil overlook it . dear , dear lizzy . a hous in town ! every thing that is charm ! three daught marry ! ten thousand a year ! oh , lord ! what wil becom of me . i shal go distract . '' thi was enough to prov that her approb nee not be doubt : and elizabe , rejo that such an effus was heard on by herself , soon went away . but bef she had been three minut in her own room , her moth follow her . `` my dearest child , '' she cri , `` i can think of noth els ! ten thousand a year , and very lik mor ! 't is as good as a lord ! and a spec lic . you must and shal be marry by a spec lic . but my dearest lov , tel me what dish mr. darcy is particul fond of , that i may hav it to-morrow . '' thi was a sad om of what her moth 's behavio to the gentlem himself might be ; and elizabe found that , though in the certain possess of his warmest affect , and sec of her rel ' cons , ther was stil someth to be wish for . but the morrow pass off much bet than she expect ; for mrs. bennet lucky stood in such aw of her intend son-in-law that she vent not to speak to him , unless it was in her pow to off him any at , or mark her def for his opin . elizabe had the satisfact of see her fath tak pain to get acquaint with him ; and mr. bennet soon ass her that he was ris every hour in his esteem . `` i admir al my three sons-in-law high , '' said he . `` wickham , perhap , is my favourit ; but i think i shal lik yo husband quit as wel as jan 's . '' chapt 60 elizabe 's spirit soon ris to play again , she want mr. darcy to account for his hav ev fal in lov with her . `` how could you begin ? '' said she . `` i can comprehend yo going on charm , when you had ont mad a begin ; but what could set you off in the first plac ? '' `` i can not fix on the hour , or the spot , or the look , or the word , which laid the found . it is too long ago . i was in the middl bef i knew that i had begun . '' `` my beauty you had ear withstood , and as for my manners—my behavio to you was at least alway bord on the uncivil , and i nev spok to you without rath wish to giv you pain than not . now be sint ; did you admir me for my impertin ? '' `` for the liv of yo mind , i did . '' `` you may as wel cal it impertin at ont . it was very littl less . the fact is , that you wer sick of civil , of def , of officy at . you wer disgust with the wom who wer alway speak , and look , and think for yo approb alon . i rous , and interest you , becaus i was so unlik them . had you not been real amy , you would hav hat me for it ; but in spit of the pain you took to disgu yourself , yo feel wer alway nobl and just ; and in yo heart , you thorough desp the person who so assidu court you . there—i hav sav you the troubl of account for it ; and real , al thing consid , i begin to think it perfect reason . to be sur , you knew no act good of me—but nobody think of that when they fal in lov . '' `` was ther no good in yo affect behavio to jan whil she was il at netherfield ? '' `` dearest jan ! who could hav don less for her ? but mak a virtu of it by al mean . my good qual ar und yo protect , and you ar to exag them as much as poss ; and , in return , it belong to me to find occas for teas and quarrel with you as oft as may be ; and i shal begin direct by ask you what mad you so unwil to com to the point at last . what mad you so shy of me , when you first cal , and afterward din her ? why , espec , when you cal , did you look as if you did not car about me ? '' `` becaus you wer grav and sil , and gav me no enco . '' `` but i was embarrass . '' `` and so was i . '' `` you might hav talk to me mor when you cam to din . '' `` a man who had felt less , might . '' `` how unlucky that you should hav a reason answ to giv , and that i should be so reason as to admit it ! but i wond how long you would hav gon on , if you had been left to yourself . i wond when you would hav spok , if i had not ask you ! my resolv of thank you for yo kind to lyd had certain gre effect . too much , i am afraid ; for what becom of the mor , if our comfort springs from a breach of prom ? for i ought not to hav ment the subject . thi wil nev do . '' `` you nee not distress yourself . the mor wil be perfect fair . lady catherin 's unjust endeavo to sep us wer the mean of remov al my doubt . i am not indebt for my pres happy to yo eag desir of express yo gratitud . i was not in a humo to wait for any op of yo . my aunt 's intellig had giv me hop , and i was determin at ont to know every thing . '' `` lady catherin has been of infinit us , which ought to mak her happy , for she lov to be of us . but tel me , what did you com down to netherfield for ? was it mer to rid to longbourn and be embarrass ? or had you intend any mor sery consequ ? '' `` my real purpos was to see you , and to judg , if i could , wheth i might ev hop to mak you lov me . my avow on , or what i avow to myself , was to see wheth yo sist wer stil part to bingley , and if she wer , to mak the confess to him which i hav sint mad . '' `` shal you ev hav cour to annount to lady catherin what is to befal her ? '' `` i am mor lik to want mor tim than cour , elizabe . but it ought to be don , and if you wil giv me a sheet of pap , it shal be don direct . '' `` and if i had not a let to writ myself , i might sit by you and admir the ev of yo writ , as anoth young lady ont did . but i hav an aunt , too , who must not be long neglect . '' from an unwil to confess how much her intim with mr. darcy had been over-rated , elizabe had nev yet answ mrs. gardin 's long let ; but now , hav that to commun which she knew would be most welcom , she was almost asham to find that her unc and aunt had already lost three day of happy , and immedy wrot as follow : '' i would hav thank you bef , my dear aunt , as i ought to hav don , for yo long , kind , satisfact , detail of particul ; but to say the tru , i was too cross to writ . you suppos mor than real ex . but now suppos as much as you choos ; giv a loos rein to yo fant , indulg yo imagin in every poss flight which the subject wil afford , and unless you believ me act marry , you can not gre er . you must writ again very soon , and pra him a gre deal mor than you did in yo last . i thank you , again and again , for not going to the lak . how could i be so sil as to wish it ! yo ide of the pony is delight . we wil go round the park every day . i am the happiest cre in the world . perhap oth peopl hav said so bef , but not on with such just . i am happy ev than jan ; she on smil , i laugh . mr. darcy send you al the lov in the world that he can spar from me . you ar al to com to pemberley at christmas . yo , etc . '' mr. darcy 's let to lady catherin was in a diff styl ; and stil diff from eith was what mr. bennet sent to mr. collin , in reply to his last . `` dear sir , '' i must troubl you ont mor for congrat . elizabe wil soon be the wif of mr. darcy . consol lady catherin as wel as you can . but , if i wer you , i would stand by the nephew . he has mor to giv . `` yo sint , etc . '' miss bingley 's congrat to her broth , on his approach marry , wer al that was affect and insint . she wrot ev to jan on the occas , to express her delight , and rep al her form profess of regard . jan was not deceiv , but she was affect ; and though feel no rely on her , could not help writ her a much kind answ than she knew was deserv . the joy which miss darcy express on receiv simil inform , was as sint as her broth 's in send it . four sid of pap wer insufficy to contain al her delight , and al her earnest desir of being lov by her sist . bef any answ could ar from mr. collin , or any congrat to elizabe from his wif , the longbourn famy heard that the collins wer com themselv to luca lodg . the reason of thi sud remov was soon evid . lady catherin had been rend so excess angry by the cont of her nephew 's let , that charlot , real rejo in the match , was anxy to get away til the storm was blown ov . at such a mom , the ar of her friend was a sint pleas to elizabe , though in the cours of their meet she must sometim think the pleas dear bought , when she saw mr. darcy expos to al the parad and obsequy civil of her husband . he bor it , howev , with admir calm . he could ev list to sir william luca , when he comply him on carry away the brightest jewel of the country , and express his hop of their al meet frequ at st. jam 's , with very dec compos . if he did shrug his should , it was not til sir william was out of sight . mrs. phillip 's vulg was anoth , and perhap a gre , tax on his forbear ; and though mrs. phillip , as wel as her sist , stood in too much aw of him to speak with the famili which bingley 's good humo enco , yet , whenev she did speak , she must be vulg . nor was her respect for him , though it mad her mor quiet , at al lik to mak her mor eleg . elizabe did al she could to shield him from the frequ not of eith , and was ev anxy to keep him to herself , and to thos of her famy with whom he might convers without mort ; and though the uncomfort feel ar from al thi took from the season of court much of it pleas , it ad to the hop of the fut ; and she look forward with delight to the tim when they should be remov from socy so littl pleas to eith , to al the comfort and eleg of their famy party at pemberley . chapt 61 happy for al her matern feel was the day on which mrs. bennet got rid of her two most deserv daught . with what delight prid she afterward visit mrs. bingley , and talk of mrs. darcy , may be guess . i wish i could say , for the sak of her famy , that the accompl of her earnest desir in the est of so many of her childr produc so happy an effect as to mak her a sens , amy , well-informed wom for the rest of her lif ; though perhap it was lucky for her husband , who might not hav rel domest fel in so unus a form , that she stil was occas nerv and invary sil . mr. bennet miss his second daught excess ; his affect for her drew him oft from hom than anyth els could do . he delight in going to pemberley , espec when he was least expect . mr. bingley and jan remain at netherfield on a twelvemon . so near a vicin to her moth and meryton rel was not desir ev to his easy temp , or her affect heart . the darl wish of his sist was then grat ; he bought an est in a neighbo county to derbyshir , and jan and elizabe , in addit to every oth sourc of happy , wer within thirty mil of each oth . kitty , to her very mat adv , spent the chief of her tim with her two eld sist . in socy so supery to what she had gen known , her improv was gre . she was not of so ungovern a temp as lyd ; and , remov from the influ of lyd 's exampl , she becam , by prop at and man , less irrit , less ign , and less insipid . from the furth disadv of lyd 's socy she was of cours car kept , and though mrs. wickham frequ invit her to com and stay with her , with the prom of bal and young men , her fath would nev cons to her going . mary was the on daught who remain at hom ; and she was necess drawn from the pursuit of accompl by mrs. bennet 's being quit un to sit alon . mary was oblig to mix mor with the world , but she could stil mor ov every morn visit ; and as she was no long mort by comparison between her sist ' beauty and her own , it was suspect by her fath that she submit to the chang without much reluct . as for wickham and lyd , their charact suff no revolv from the marry of her sist . he bor with philosoph the convict that elizabe must now becom acquaint with whatev of his ingratitud and fals had bef been unknown to her ; and in spit of every thing , was not whol without hop that darcy might yet be prevail on to mak his fortun . the congrat let which elizabe receiv from lyd on her marry , explain to her that , by his wif at least , if not by himself , such a hop was cher . the let was to thi effect : '' my dear lizzy , '' i wish you joy . if you lov mr. darcy half as wel as i do my dear wickham , you must be very happy . it is a gre comfort to hav you so rich , and when you hav noth els to do , i hop you wil think of us . i am sur wickham would lik a plac at court very much , and i do not think we shal hav quit money enough to liv upon without som help . any plac would do , of about three or four hundr a year ; but howev , do not speak to mr. darcy about it , if you had rath not . `` yo , etc . '' as it hap that elizabe had much rath not , she endeavo in her answ to put an end to every entreaty and expect of the kind . such reliev , howev , as it was in her pow to afford , by the pract of what might be cal econom in her own priv exp , she frequ sent them . it had alway been evid to her that such an incom as their , und the direct of two person so extrav in their want , and heedless of the fut , must be very insufficy to their support ; and whenev they chang their quart , eith jan or herself wer sur of being apply to for som littl assist toward discharg their bil . their man of liv , ev when the rest of peac dismiss them to a hom , was unsettl in the extrem . they wer alway mov from plac to plac in quest of a cheap situ , and alway spend mor than they ought . his affect for her soon sunk into indiff ; her last a littl long ; and in spit of her you and her man , she retain al the claim to reput which her marry had giv her . though darcy could nev receiv him at pemberley , yet , for elizabe 's sak , he assist him furth in his profess . lyd was occas a visit ther , when her husband was gon to enjoy himself in london or bath ; and with the bingley they both of them frequ staid so long , that ev bingley 's good humo was overcom , and he process so far as to talk of giv them a hint to be gon . miss bingley was very deeply mort by darcy 's marry ; but as she thought it adv to retain the right of visit at pemberley , she dropt al her res ; was fond than ev of georgian , almost as at to darcy as heretof , and paid off every arrear of civil to elizabe . pemberley was now georgian 's hom ; and the attach of the sist was exact what darcy had hop to see . they wer abl to lov each oth ev as wel as they intend . georgian had the highest opin in the world of elizabe ; though at first she oft list with an aston bord on alarm at her liv , sport , man of talk to her broth . he , who had alway inspir in herself a respect which almost overcam her affect , she now saw the object of op pleasantry . her mind receiv knowledg which had nev bef fal in her way . by elizabe 's instruct , she beg to comprehend that a wom may tak liberty with her husband which a broth wil not alway allow in a sist mor than ten year young than himself . lady catherin was extrem indign on the marry of her nephew ; and as she gav way to al the genuin frank of her charact in her reply to the let which annount it arrang , she sent him langu so very abud , espec of elizabe , that for som tim al intercours was at an end . but at leng , by elizabe 's persuas , he was prevail on to overlook the off , and seek a recont ; and , aft a littl furth resist on the part of his aunt , her res gav way , eith to her affect for him , or her curios to see how his wif conduc herself ; and she condescend to wait on them at pemberley , in spit of that pollut which it wood had receiv , not mer from the pres of such a mistress , but the visit of her unc and aunt from the city . with the gardin , they wer alway on the most intim term . darcy , as wel as elizabe , real lov them ; and they wer both ev sens of the warmest gratitud toward the person who , by bring her into derbyshir , had been the mean of unit them . 